Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	This begins the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, know that I have given you this book as a gift, the last of the art of medicine, for its completion serves your health, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, it is clear to me how I have completed that which I promised in this treatise. This work is part of my surgical practice.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation on a human being is relegated to our region and in our time, almost entirely private, where its science endures great risk, and its traces are left behind; it would not have survived without some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which corrected many errors and misunderstandings about it. The interpretations of these were often closed off and the effort required to understand them was extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and for bringing it to conform with the forms of the tools of cauterization and other work instruments, as well as for adding the declaration, and preparing it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why no skilled artisan exists in their own hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires being exercised in front of knowledge in the science of anatomy, as Guali knew about the youth of body parts and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; he had knowledge of bones, nerves, and muscles, including their number and structure. He was aware of pulsatile veins and quiet ones, and the sites for their discharge.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And that's why Hippocrates said in his book, mostly in the art of the hand, that skill is everything.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy cannot avoid falling into error, which will lead to the death of people. I have seen too many cases like this, where some are formed in this science and abandon their own field of study and experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	And I have seen a surgeon skilled and experienced who has caused an erysipelas to occur on the neck of a woman, and by incising some neck arteries that there was a large hemorrhage resulting in her death during one of his operations.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another surgeon who was about to remove a hernia from an old man whose condition had deteriorated, the hernia being large. It moved towards him and removed that hernia with a piece of the bladder. As a result, that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already attempted to remove that, and I saw that due to the size of the hernia and the position of the patient under him, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another surgeon who was taking pay from the Duke of our land for surgery, and operated on a black captain who had been hit by his horse; he took advantage of the surgeon's ignorance to remove the fracture, covering the wound with bandages and splints made of strong material, and did not allow air into the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he would slip according to his desires, and afterward he would dress the wound, and then allowed it to heal over several days as commanded by our prescriptions; this also happens when the skin and chest are erysipelas infected, leading to disaster.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I have attempted this for him, and helped to slip out the obstruction, achieving tranquility and alleviation of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so I couldn't restrain it, and it continued to spread the corruption within the body as the patient's condition deteriorated.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another surgeon who drilled an abscess and was ulcerated several days later, during which his illness increased in the lord's presence.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is the reason why the wet nurse must be pure of melancholy humor; otherwise, it would affect him with all its strength, but rather that there is a member that suffers from everything being affected by it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to have the operation on a person divided into two parts: one associated with health and in work where danger is present in major circumstances.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already set out this in all parts of this book where there is operation involving error and fear; it is necessary for you to keep that in mind so that the pages do not accuse you and mislead you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take your weapons in the service of God and protection, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way with God's grace to obtain health and reasonable succession, and tolerate the terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and keep your weapons away from what you fear, so that recovery is in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for more remain at your glory, and also in this world and later on your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guali already said in some of his monochords:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Don't treat bad patients with bad medicine, for it is not the fault of doctors that they are named badly."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have completed this book according to three main points.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and first comes the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered within the feet, in the forms of the tools and in the implements of the cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning drying and puncturing, as well as the use of blisters, plagues, extraction of arrows, and resemblance to those, all organized and detailed in the forms of the tools.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of torsion and resemblance to those. The chapter is organized within foot ailments, detailing in the forms of the tools.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	About the cautery with fire and the use of acute medicine, remembering the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	And with this begins the discussion on all the free topics.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Let me tell you about the quality of those cauteries and their lumps, and in which phase it is prohibited to use a cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery's lump and its lump is long and tedious, subtle in knowledge, and hidden in secrecy; already many wise people have spoken about it in detail, and they disagree among themselves, yet I am content with a small part of their discourses, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And I say that the cautery confirms to any phase universally made of matter or sex matter, except for two phases; those are phases made of sex matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the phase of dryness and heat, there is matter; some argue that the cautery should be applied to such conditions, while others say the opposite. They believe it's not convenient for an illness characterized by its nature and dryness, as fire has these qualities. It's inconvenient for a caudal and dry ailment when treated with something hot and dry which might heal it instead of being detrimental.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And the one who disagrees with this argues that in all dry and hot ailments that occur within human bodies, when you compare the body of a person to the phase of fire, you find that the human body is cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the discourse of this, which I have experimented with for several times and discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not delve into what has already been extensively discussed in the chapter on cautery and known through later exercises. I understand the variety of human phases and the distribution of illnesses among their members, as well as the causes of those illnesses and the occurrences related to them, and the timing for those events.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other phases, do not worry about this, especially with wet and humid illnesses; already all doctors have agreed on these, there is no disagreement. And they are not concerned with the use of cautery in wet conditions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that in the secret of healing with fire and the goodness of this matter, concerning cautery using medicine, it is because fire is simple; its action only reaches the part that is treated by cautery and does not extend to other parts unless there's a slight injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of medicine used for burning reaches those parts of the body where it was applied, and it significantly increases the difficulty in healing an illness in that body part, making recovery quite hard.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	The fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything except excess. We have known this through experiments and long years of service studying the art, understanding the truth about their causes; thus I justify myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that my freedom in writing this passage did not allow me to reveal this secret related to fire, as well as the quality of its operation within bodies and its expulsion, which would serve as a philosophical demonstration revealing itself in your minds, it would be enlightening for you.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to apply cautery and wait for the best springtime period.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at any time because the injury caused by time's passage is submerged in the heat of what was applied with the cautery, especially if it's for pain or necessary pains, strong ones and pimples which do not suffer from delay as they are feared compared to those that might cause malice, which is more significant than a small injury coming over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not pass in your minds, or, children, they only consider what the common people and ordinary folk doctors think, that is, it's not necessary to apply cautery at all times when healing from an illness; thus there is a consequence with that.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not as simple as they think; cautery is merely a form of medicine that alters phase and dries out the humidity which causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	And indeed, unnecessary cautery over medicine due to the value and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it's possible that the patient's illness could return at any time depending on the phase of their illness and the location of their ailment, its virtue, what is prepared within their body from accumulating superfluities, as well as what is ingested in foods related to those causes; unless the illness being treated with cautery is a subtle illness involving few superfluities and humidity. For instance, when dental cautery is done for pain, it's possible that this type of pain doesn't return within them anymore, though this happens in smaller cases.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	A common medical term is that the cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this is a professional discourse, not one I understand in it, they say that using it does not constitute treatment nor another cause leading to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is against this; and I understand that the cautery is the last resort of medicine not simply when administering the methods of treatment for some illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause one applies cautery, and proceeds with that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here comes the view that the cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding, which agrees with common knowledge and many doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients would say that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they would not say this simply because of the equality in terms of value between gold and the inferiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the location for applying the cautery does not cause a burn, as this is not absolutely true; I have already experimented with this and found out that it doesn't do this unless in certain parts of the body, where a gold cautery is good and better than an iron one just like they would say. Yet however, when you apply the cautery using fire onto metal, you are not told to do this, as the heat depends on the quantity you want based on the size of the gold, and how it needs to be received in preparation; and if you adjust over the flame, the gold melts with the fire; and in case of burning in the fire, a few sheets are produced for the artisan to work upon that part.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, when applying the iron cautery, you should do so more gently and more precisely according to the principles of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter concerning the cautery according to sections, and I have organized those of the section within the feet, because I will ask you for what you want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding the application of a cautery for head pain caused by coldness and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The first section.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This application of cautery brings about the effect of humidity and coldness onto a specific part of the body where two causes are involved, causing swelling, inflammation, and traumatic flow, known as "corissa," from the head to other parts of the neck and ear fluid, along with various sleep issues, tooth pain, throat problems, and universally for all illnesses caused by coldness, whether they are paralytic, swollen, or resulting in stroke, and similar conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is like this, initially instruct the patient to undergo a medicine-based elimination of toxins from their head for three or four nights, according to what you require and the patient's health condition and routine.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And subsequently command the patient to clean their head with a razor and then make them lie down on a sloped bench, placing their hands under their back.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And place the palm of your hand next to the nose's edge between their ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when you have determined the right location as advised by you, mark that spot with your finger and then apply an olive oil cautery of this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place it over the marked spot on your heated hand in such a way that as you descend, your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see some amount of skull being exposed already, like the quantity of fat that sticks out, in this case, lift your hand, and if it doesn't heat up with iron or another type when placed on it, especially if it's cold, then you will observe the condition I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on that spot, and let that sit for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place an unripe buttercote over it and let that sit until the layer of burnt skin is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently, cure the area with tetrarhompha cream until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they have said that whenever the wound is opened like this, it's much better and quicker to heal compared to when it isn't, because it heals faster and rejuvenates more.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say that when the canal is burnt into the bone, and then letting the cautery remain until it adheres to some part of the bone's surface.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape off this burnt bone piece, and then let it heal.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say that when the cautery reaches the deepest point, it strengthens the bone inside until the bone breaks through, and this is how you perform this treatment:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate that from that place, vapor from the head escapes.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound remain open for a long time, and then it will be healed once it has been consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Nowadays I do not see these two kinds of head cauteries at all, but in some individuals according to fear; let this stand: it's better for health when done immediately, as the head is healed through the continuity of its own juices as we've witnessed in other body parts, and especially so when the head is made of fatty nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the type of cautery first is more saving and better you must use it; and from that one, do that work until it is healed.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the head's cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting head pain occurs throughout the whole body, and this lasts in the patient for a long time, using remedies like herbs, spices, poultices, oils, combs, scissors, gauze, and bandages, especially if an earlier cautery has been used which didn't alleviate the effects of those causes; then consider that if the head is strong by nature; and doesn't undergo severe pain or fever, then this cautery uses another kind, letting the previous one use a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And place that cautery on the top of their head, within which the pain is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the pain and reveal its quantity from the opening of the mouth, which we have measured, and place that on a cautery in the part behind the head at the location which is called the vessel - and this is the location where suction is made.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And warm your hand in ashes, and do not reveal the mouth, for when this is done, the patient experiences various intense pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I shall say this about the cautery in its place, that when one uses a cautery to cauterize the heads and occiputs of the head is more subtle than the one used which cauterizes the middle of the head; and this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	Final chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment for new migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain is concentrated in the head or occurs inside the skull, it should be treated with medicines that soothe headaches and then administer another cure which I have described in treatments for illnesses; if none of these methods work, then the cautery treatment for this would be done in two ways: either using an acute burning medicine as a cautery, or using iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	A cautery made with a burning medicine is that you take half a clove of garlic, crush it and cut off the ends from both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then prick the pain spot on the temple with a pointed needle inside where you make the incision, inside where the pain is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen yourself by stopping any descent of congestion, let that flow through spaces of three hours; and gently remove the garlic, leave the wound for two or three days, and rest on your elbow with it submerged in water until the place becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment once it has healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see fit, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the detailed treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	A cautery made with iron follows this way: heat it up to use as a cautery, in the following manner:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called a thorn lock, where the head of the patient resembles a thorn in which there is some curvature, and at the middle of the head is a small elevation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And place your hand over the location of pain, and hold it back - so that you do not burn the skin which is under this - and slowly rotate the small iron piece with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of it that is burned by the sensitivity of the pain is as much as half of this, lift your hand in such a way that the artery which under this is not burned either, so that no blood flow occurs.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak your elbow in salt water and place it over the area, let this rest for three days; and then rest with a damp cloth on the water, and then cure with ointment once it has healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see fit, cauterize at the end of the bistoury (surgical knife) as per cautery instructions, and watch that you do not make an incision into the artery in this new migraine.
Capitol quart.	Final chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the treatment for old migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines using what we have said about the cure previously, and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, if this treatment is not sufficient for you, and times when the illness does not reach what was said of the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then consider that you should ignite the surgical knife so that it turns white, which signifies over the area of pain on a line of length where most of what was said belongs, or place this; and rest your hand for one time and strengthen that while you prick the skin and delve into the skull.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is crushed by chewing, and that the tongue does not stick to it, and that the nerves that affect this do not cause cramps.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut, there is fear in this dissection, especially for those who do not understand what they are doing and lack experience; and leave the operation as planned.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I shall return to recall the regulation of blood flow from an artery accident according to its manner, in this section of this work.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness that does not satisfy this cautery and sees the body of the head tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have measured, and cure the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery we mentioned for the tip of the artery where there is a cautery, with two needles. This is a better and more accurate cautery.
Capitol .v.	Capitol refers to the extremity or tip.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of earache through cautery.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear is caused by friction and is cured due to lack of substances, and another treatment which I have mentioned in the division, if the pain is not alleviated, then apply fire cautery, and this is the type called punctum, whose form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place the point near the opening, and move it around the entire area of the ear like a wheel is being turned, or in any circuit if the pain occurs at any time.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue with the ear cautery little by little until you find where the pain is and test it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if cautery of these points covers the entire ear and there is no relief, then carefully treat the areas inside where they are healing.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol refers to the sixth part or section.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the treatment of curvature through cautery.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Curvature that is treated and healed through cautery can only be with substances that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the substance that is due to dryness or muscle spasms of nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of curvature with jellies, purgatives, and antispasmodics, and if your treatment does not work, then follow this procedure when you cauterize the patient: first, cauterize the opening of the ear, second, make a small cut on its skin edge, and third, cauterize the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery at the opposite side of the diseased part, for relief is only found in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is that you apply it at the tip of the opening of the ear much higher than a little above the corn of the head, and on its skin edge another, whose length should be according to the length of that particular spot, and then pause your hand with the cautery until that quantity of the substance of the disease in the tendon is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is how the cautery works, it's an art of surgery, the form of which is demonstrated in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it's somewhat subtle that if you add a little here and there; then when the needle goes into its place of excessive roughness, do so slightly.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with what's in front during the process until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol refers to the seventh part or section.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the treatment of old apoplexy through cautery.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and treated with what we've mentioned and if your medicine does not work and the patient doesn't have a fever, then apply cautery to it at four points: over all parts of their head; with the point and middle of the head as we said; and with cautery on the chest.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of applying cautery is done according to what was mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And once it has been treated over the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; then carefully treat with what you are using.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol refers to the eighth part or section.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the treatment of forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	And if you give them to the patient during meals, large jellies and pills that will help their digestion.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then remove the cap over the entire head and pause on their chest with an ointment as described in the treatment of ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that for a few applications; this is the method of applying cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to that order of procedures which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if for those things he is well; otherwise, then apply to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which should descend from the higher part of the head into the lower part near the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each application for the entirety of that, and then treat the cautery with what has been done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if you increase and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery to the middle part; and if you find greater tolerance, then apply cautery over both parts of the head.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And treat that area until it heals; and apply the olive oil according to the method shown in front.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol refers to the ninth part or section.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the treatment of paralysis and the softening of the entire body through cautery.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	And if you are in the process of softening the head with jellies and what we have mentioned; then remove the cap from the patient's head, and apply cautery to it at the middle of the head, and on all parts of the head, and on the rear part of their body, and do three cauterizations over their cervical vertebrae.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for many patients and their tolerance is great and the disease is severe, then apply cautery to them at four cauterizations over both cervical vertebrae, subsequently applying the hand with cautery until that muscle mass has been burned from them, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then treat what needs to be healed, and this one should have an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capital X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the treatment of epilepsy through cautery.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not the patient with epilepsy who is treated by cautery, but rather those cases of epilepsy that are due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus, when you start modifying the patient's brain at the beginning of their years and later in another treatment which we have described in the division when the patient is old and can tolerate the side effects of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot endure the medicines, then provide nourishment that strengthens and chews, modify the diet for these days, improving the digestion of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery on the back of the head, and over each bone on the head, he applies a cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply cauteries using those I have mentioned, having a paralytic and soothing effect on the spine in the neck region and the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply an olive cautery according to what has been described previously.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Capital XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Regarding the treatment of melancholy through cautery.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are dampness corrupted and phlegm thickened, then apply cautery with the cauteries that we have mentioned previously for paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess leading to melancholy and the patient's body is wet, then have them drink that which clears the brain according to what has been described in the division previously.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient's head, and then make a reasonable concoction of wormwood over it on the circle, and place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient rest for sixty days, and keep them under observation from every side.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply an ointment; it is worthy of being rubbed with the grease from sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for a warm preparation according to measure, which they should endure as it increases in them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that on the middle of the patient's head within the circle, and let them rest until it cools.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient every day of the week once, under their other regime while they are being cured; or if you wish, apply cautery making petting points according to what is best for them, so that your hand remains with a prepared cautery: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then let that cooked piece rest in oil or in lard.
Capitol .xii.	Capital XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Regarding the treatment of descending water through cautery in the stomach.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that the beginning of water has occurred in the stomach according to the symptoms I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient that which clears their head, and keep them away from all dampness.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sugar dissolve in water over several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then instruct the patient to shave their head, and apply cautery with a cautery on the middle of the head; and if it is the beginning of water in two stomachs, or from one side if it's the beginning of water in one stomach, then apply two cauterizations on each temple.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Let the cautery touch all veins and arteries that are left from the treatment; and let the cauterizations be in that length, around the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep yourself from any bleeding when it is being treated; and if you see blood from them, stop for a moment with some medicine which is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with knowledge about that which is in the extraction of arteries and about avoiding those, and caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it must be treated on the neck between the two bones with two cauterizations placed one after the other.
Capitol .xiii.	Capital XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Regarding the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the stomachs are ancient and due to veins and arteries located on the forehead area, and it is confirmed that this is an excess causing phlegm-like conditions, then apply cautery with a previously described cautery for the beginning of water affecting the stomachs, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head, two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations on the neck between the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you suffer from excess, then apply cautery across the entire length of the stomach on the outer edge of the eyebrow with small cauteries.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capital XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Regarding the treatment of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating that with what we have described in the division and it doesn't improve your treatment, then prepare and give three nights of garlic to the patient; and then shave the head of the patient, and apply a medium olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply a rosemary cautery with two small cauterizations on each eyebrow, leaving just a little hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And make the point of the cautery, this is its method.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Regarding the cautery for the blanching and smoothing of the eyelids of rabbits.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the rabbit is inflamed or due to disease or moisture, then apply a cautery over that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is how you do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you are doing it, apply the cautery over both eyebrows for a little bit with two cauteries across its entirety, and let them extend to the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too much against the cautery, but according to how much of the eyelid's curved part becomes heated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Regarding the cautery for the eyelid of the rabbit when the skin has turned into parts inside and extends to the belly of the rabbit.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the rabbit turns into parts inside such that it touches the belly, apply a cautery to those in two ways: either use an ordinary cautery or one with medicinal properties.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use a rabbit cautery with fire, command the patient to show their skin like those that are shaved, within which they should be extended and equalized; and if you hold onto that, then grasp the rabbit's skin with one hand so that it does not get burned until the hair grows out from under the skin.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are extended and equalized, then place the head of the patient in your own hand, and place over the eyelids of the rabbit with a sign indicating it like the figure of a fern leaf, and make the start of the sign close to the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place a small amount of rabbit's albumen or pus from a boil on the belly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply the heat of the cautery, which is how you do it for this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And gradually apply the heat of the cautery over the sign which you've made, little by little in patches until it burns the surface of the skin like a fern leaf, entirely resembling that.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And as a sign of healing for the patient's work, you should see that the eyelid of the rabbit is now pulled back and its hair is raised above the needle's puncture.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and leave that for three days, then place over it a small amount of butter until the scab is fully formed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if there is any cause that returns to their location and the eyelid becomes inflamed again, then do another round of cautery over that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is still present on the eyelid, then apply a cautery until it returns to its natural place and becomes equalized so that the hair does not touch the belly.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery with medicinal properties is this: command the patient to show their skin until it is extended and equalized, then have it done in the shape of a fern leaf from a piece of cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some well-known soap and a living onion root. .1., Mix that and let it cook until it doesn't cool down; then spread that over the cloth which was made in this shape like a fern leaf, place that on one or both rabbits; and place the rabbit's head in your own hand.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the described above over the medicine and press it a little bit but don't burn the patient with it, which burning sensation should be like that of fire in them.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you notice the burning sensation, then remove the medicine and place it in your designated hand; once that burning sensation stops, then rinse the medicine off on their belly with water; then consider if the eyelid has lifted as if it is washed of by fire or incision, which happens immediately afterwards; and if it doesn't return to that area of the medicine over the spot where the medicine was not applied and does not touch until your operation is fully equalized and the rabbit's hair is pulled back.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And place over it a small amount of butter or another substance until it heals, ensuring that the scab associated with itching is eradicated and then treat it with an ointment or something else until it has healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And for this to be necessary, you must keep vigilant care with your operation so that the medicine doesn't fall off in the rabbit's belly; if the eyelid becomes soft after some days and any cause of hair touching it, then apply your medicine over that area which is made soft by the eyelid, precisely as you did at first, and place the patient until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is how a fern leaf looks.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that humans' rabbits vary according to size and thickness, so your operation depends on this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let there be no concealment of the path to rectitude towards that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Regarding the surgical treatment of a fistula that occurs in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula, remember what we've discussed in the division of illnesses and do not proceed with your treatment. Instead, follow this method for cautery: instruct the patient to hold their head on your side, and place another servant's hand between your hands as if to support them without disturbing or agitating them under their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then hold the point close in the white part of the eye or on the mucous membrane above the patient's tear duct.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now heat up the cautery tool like this:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be rounded, such as in the shape of a cane or a bird's quill feather, with one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you can see, it should penetrate to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if desired, it should be removed in such a way as to avoid damage.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, whoever is rounder tends better towards your task.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if the fistula has opened, press it gently and help the patient obtain relief and dry out that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from the patient.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on the patient's eye the heated cautery, and hold your hand near but not quite at the tear duct to the nasal passage, so that your hand doesn't disturb the patient or make them anxious. Then pause the cautery in the gray area of the eye and proceed with this task.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery it enters the nostril, it's good; otherwise, then you should apply the cautery once or twice as needed and leave it like that for three days. Then place this point with a border on the eye area and insert some dried grease inside until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if it has passed ten days and is not healed, then place on the corrosive quick medicine inside that the nostril be exposed and shave according to what suits in its forehead.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And this is another method for cautery of a fistula which some earlier practitioners said: find the location of the fistula and perform it there, then pause above that fissure with a fine sliver, resembling its form. Place in that area an amount the size of one nail of melted lead; hold your hand over it with good pressure, making sure not to disturb the patient so that the melted lead does not enter their tear ducts; and when you pause on the patient's eye with heat like a point in a white part or water, let the lead melt at the site of the fistula and heal it through wonderful treatment.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we've discussed with cautery and treatment, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to administer nostril extraction and reduce the fistula to within the nasal passage according to where it naturally occurs.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Regarding the cautery of a cut under the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Wounds often result in cuts on the lips, and more so on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And just as you treat those cuts following what we have discussed in the divisions and do not proceed with your treatment, then heat up the small knife's cautery according to this method that suits:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then pause that initial point within those cuts where the cautery reaches up to the edge of the cuts.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with a poultice so that it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Regarding the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the tonsil area or on the palate or in the area of the teeth where pus occurs, you make a cut and then it breaks open, heals over time, and forms a fistula. When this happens, treat that instead of continuing treatment, so follow that method for using the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, place that ignited point into the outlet of the fistula, hold your hand inside until the heat of the fire reaches its edge, do this once or twice afterward; then treat it as we have discussed regarding treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing has been removed and it heals, it's good; otherwise, then it is necessary to uncover the place and preserve the bone according to what suits its capital.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Regarding tooth cautery and soothing of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are tender, if you treat those with medicines instead of proceeding, then place the patient's head on your side, heat up the cautery in such a way that it is inserted soon, pause the small part over each tooth, insert the heated cautery quickly, hold your hand near so that the heat from the fire reaches the edge of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then raise your hand, and proceed to apply the cautery several times according to your wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then have the patient rinse their mouth with salty water and keep it there for an hour, after which they should spit it out, so that the tender tooth is hardened, the soft gums are strengthened, and the moisture in the mouth is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of dental pain through cautery.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When dental pain is due to coldness or worms, or if the treatment does not respond to medicine, then apply cautery in two ways: either on the gum border, or directly with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery on the gum involves taking cow's gums and boiling them in iron pots. Next, take a small piece and cover it at the tip of the tool, then immerse that into hot water, holding it over the painful tooth until it gets cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeatedly apply this several times so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see this, soak wool or cloth in the gum above mentioned, hold that over the painful tooth, and place a burning iron on it until the heat reaches to the tip of the tooth cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when applying cautery with fire, you must wait for the steam of herbs or iron to occur and there should be some heat in the patient's body that does not reach into the mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then apply the cautery in the form it will take, hold it over the tooth and place your hand until the cautery cools down; do this several times so that the pain decreases or on that day or the other.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And let the patient be filled with that cautery that fills their mouth with good gum and hold it for an hour, then they should gargle; this is the way of applying cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply cautery wherever you see the extremity according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is how the applicator works:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of protruding hernias through cautery.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are due to phlegm and body fluids that do not respond to digestion through medicine, and you see slight improvement in their digestion, then apply the cautery following this method: having two normal extremities each for which the smoke of applying the cautery should be done on the other extremity. Hold the ignited tool over the pus cavity once, and another if needed until it reaches into the tip of the cavity.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the pus cavity is small, then hold the cautery according to the amount of pus. Then rest it over the area for three days and place a cloth soaked in grease on the iron while it's still hot until what the fire has burnt heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointments, swabs, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The method of applying the cautery or applicator in this way is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the treatment of throat inflammation and constriction through cautery.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity enters the pulmonary channel, especially when it is due to cold constitution, then ensure that the patient starts with medicine for evacuation, and apply cautery to that part of the throat where there is a compression.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And make sure not to let the cautery reach the larynx, nor burn too much of its neck but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Apply cautery on another part, targeting the junction between the neck and the lower back area of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And apply the cautery to his collar bone in the same manner as previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And continue treating it with what was previously done until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the treatment of lung disease and cough through cautery.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When lung cough and lung disease are due to humidity, and the patient does not have fever or typhus but is old lung disease, then apply cautery on two parts over the trachea at the compressed places of the throat and chest; and for another application in the middle part of the chest between two nipples; and for the collar bone cautery as was described previously.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, make your cautery puncture on the points of the cauteries that are called puncture, as described in the description of ear pain treatment.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points inside the cuts; and continue treating it with what was previously applied until it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And after each cautery session, you have three more sessions for that treatment. For one session, you can perform three cauteries according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the treatment of tickling that is at the head of the spine.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the spine is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return in its usual time, you should first reduce the dislocation while letting the patient return, then make them move slightly so that it gets back again as we have demonstrated. Then ensure that the patient turns their head onto their two hands or onto their sides; and raise the neck which is at the part inside of tickling to the parts above your left hand fingers, if the joint is dislocated inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery with two heads; this is how you do it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then apply a cautery between that which goes into the other side; and the image of the cautery treatment will come this way from four points of the cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that subtle one according to the amount of heat; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And certain treatments are adjusted according to this count, and these are the cautery methods. VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And place on the cautery with salt points, and then fasten the patient in bed, and let the limb not be burned for some time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and the cause is from the heat, do this, then apply a cautery on the muscle over the cauterizing point or with moisture points. Where the joint is confirmed and the dampness is eliminated and the patient is cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cautery for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and moisture enter the stomach causing an excess of its composition, and you multiply these wetnesses for him, and if you continue the methods of treatment without confirming, then let it be that the patient is over his two knees bent, and extends his hands and things. And apply a cautery on that with three cauterizations: in one, let him place his feet by the size of a hand's worth of the cautery, and at two cauterizations leave on both sides of the area for the triangular image of a triangular cautery to come about; and extend between those who are not adjusted so they perform reduction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the intestines.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, apply a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery according to the circular shape as shown:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And have the stomach cautery made where that which is scared by this cautery is: and you place points on the stomach according to your desire with heat, and then apply the cautery on those points; and treat that with a cure that comes before until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cautery for the rectum fissure.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the rectum due to coldness or moisture or excess wind causing it to exceed its normal composition, and if the patient is treated with what we have said without confirming, then let it be that the patient is bent over their hips, and you apply three cauterizations according to this form; and this half of the quantity on either side of the rectum between the inguinal creases, until lying on one's back.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the size of a finger; and have the cauterizations according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not confuse your understanding with the movement of the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is applied equals half of the thickness of the intestines, and it should not be adjusted too much; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, which already extends their things, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And if it is possible for you to apply these cauterizations with a surgical knife, when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And remember not to overdo the cautery process, ensure that the heat is applied to all of the intestines so it reaches throughout the body and penetrates into the organs where the intestines are delicate; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On puncturing an abscess in the rectum with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is irritation or an abscess in the rectum and you want to know if that abscess is within the flesh of the rectum or on its covering, then if it's within the flesh of the rectum, the patient becomes weakened and pain intensifies.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it's on the covering of the rectum, with the pain is greatly intensified and often exhausts doctors in treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So let the patient lie on their back; and then find the location of the abscess with your hand; and then heat up the cautery which is similar to a reed, as its shape was shown in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply the cautery there and within until all of the intestines are heated up, until it reaches the anus, until one feels warmth.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with cure for the other abscesses until he is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this way of cautery but only that which is prolonged in the study of medical art and has known many maladies with it; rather, try some treatments on this operation, however follow my advice here and it will be better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cautery for boils.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The old cautery methods for boils involved scratching according to this manner of doing it, and what you should take from the wisdom of Aristotle's zoology is a long sharp tooth that is found there, with length equal to a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and heat it over a fire, and apply a cautery at the site which is between the continuation of the scapula towards the spine; and with two cauterizations place them diagonally, one slightly sloping downwards to where the beard leaves off, and another two cauterizations on this line sloping down from the fifth rib to the ilium, sloping one slightly backwards; and make another cautery in the middle of the leg; then apply a cautery over the stomach, and three cauterizations at the sites sloping backwards; and place another cautery in that site which is between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on both sides of the leg, let the cautery be placed between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And don't remove your hand from under the cautery, rather show it in action on the patient's body.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it has been said by some ancient ones that these are the actions of men who use a type of iron cauterization resembling hot fire and ashes, which they place in that area between the ribs where we reach towards that lump inside, as we have described for the lump in the throat.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	When performing this puncture with a cautery, there is no need for fear; as you have already experienced it recently when dealing with the fistula where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the treatment of removing pus through cautery.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the pus disease as we have instructed for treatment in division and do not apply your own cure, then when applying cautery to it, there are three ways, all of which are directional. Of these, one is that you make three or four lines of cauterization according to the length of the pus like the figure of the cauterizations in the throat, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cauterization there should be the width of a finger or a little less, and the method of applying the cautery is the same way we described for the cautery in the throat.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not pull your hand away from under the cautery; and have the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to apply the cautery, that is, you should ignite the cautery with two streams of liquid, which we have described in the chapter about muscle dislocation, and raise the body part where the pus is located so that it can drain out from the left side of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And make your elevation according to which you raise the body part according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both streams, ignite them, in that space where they reach the spine from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are done.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see fit, apply three streams with a single cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then treat the pus that has remained to drain for too many days, as it may require more careful attention than other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be performed throughout the body in dropsy, but only in its proper place.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy using the methods of treatment we have described in division and do not apply your own cure, then you should perform four cauterizations around the umbilicus and one on the stomach, and another on the throat, and another on pus. And place two cauterizations between the vertebrae of each side, and one on the right side of the leg, and make another cauterization on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportionate to the thickness of the spine.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the cauterizations open sufficiently so that pus can drain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient for treatment immediately next to the cauterization, as it allows two interpretations and should be accompanied by therapeutic assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauterization on which it is applied to the abdomen should be in the form of a bow according to its previous shape, and that which is cauterized around the waist should be olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the treatment of applying cautery to feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen due to dropsy and full of watery pus, you should apply cautery to the feet on each side between the thumb and ring finger, lift your hand under the cautery and do not twist it; then lift your hand slightly, and do not turn it completely as the watery pus will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be made in this way: Then apply two cauterizations on each thigh, and for any part, make a cauterization at the tip of the knife-like part.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cauterizations according to the length of the thigh: you kneel and place your other knee in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the opened wound drain for a long time to allow some water to drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat those causes which we have described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the treatment of applying cautery to abdominal regions.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal pain is due to wind and moisture causing discomfort in the intestines, it is the digestive and retaining properties that cause this. These are located in the stomach and in the intestines, and this condition can be treated using treatment methods without causing any harm. Often, the patient suffers from a cautery of the virtue, so perform a large cauterization on their stomach according to what preceded during the stomach cautery, then do the same with the circle cauterization and four cauterizations in the circuit of subtle abdominals, with subtle clavilh cauterization; and do a cauterization over the anus on that area or perform two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you notice excessive moisture and the patient tolerates this, then perform a cautery on their umbilicus and on the intestines, strengthen your adjustments with two cauterizations on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, which is a perfect cure for youthful ailments from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When dealing with old hemorrhoids in nature or those filled with thick fluids or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division without harming your treatment, then perform a cautery on three areas on the pus left behind by both small and triangular points, and do two more cauterizations above the umbilicus.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that the stomach of the patient is cooled and their food is not being digested properly, along with their face appearing swollen, then perform a large cauterization on the stomach according to what precedes; and do one more on the buttocks, and another on the chest. Do a cautery on the clavilh area, and allow the cauterization to cool for some time before opening up again to treat until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cautery of the thorax near their operation site.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the thymus gland, then you apply the cautery that has been prepared as a rod of fire.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place the ignited object in the thymus gland incision and continue your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which it carries the poison.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice; if thistles are too many, then cauterize each one as we have recounted, and continue to treat them with the remedies that you apply while they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you perform a large cautery on a thistle, it will be more effective in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cautery of abscesses that occur naturally within their parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they will be cured with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when you find an abscess in nature later on and it is old, with disease and corrupted moisture, then the pus that deserves to drain escapes through this subtle opening. And you should know the depth of the wound according to the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And ignite the cautery that resembles a rod.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that ignited cautery into this abscess, and according to the depth in which it reaches the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate applying the cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned out, either once, twice, or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the abscess goes towards the bladder's body or towards the intestines, then avoid all those areas. Do this only when the abscess is in a fleshly location and you think it is not penetrating deeply.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And continue to treat the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and once removed are all its contents, and it remains for a long time like this, then know that it has been fully healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the contents are not exclusively yours, then know that it is penetrating or at its base there's corruption of your body, or it stems from those causes which will bring memory to their location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of boils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in boils you experience pain due to friction or due to thick wind, and the groin of the patient is swollen, then know that you should cauterize each boil with a cautery on each boil and apply a subtle cautery corresponding to their cause.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize a small area immediately after that, for three linear cauteries will come from it, and they will be more effective in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When it happens in the bladder due to friction and moisture such that the patient doesn't retain urine, then perform a cautery on the area filled with pus below the bladder, like where the skin starts from the umbilicus, and do so with one cauterization on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the pus; perform a cauterization with a cautery in the lower part of both sides; or do two cauterizations if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And perform the subtle cautery as described.
Capitol .xxxix.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Regarding the cautery treatment for the eye.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the vein and moisture enter the eye, and in such cases it is forbidden to undertake pregnancy, and if her menstrual periods are affected by this, they become delayed and provoke pain during urination. In that case, one should apply a cautery three times along the umbilical circuit, as we have described for the bladder in previous sections; or with a single cautery over the area where there is pus, or perhaps two cauteries, ensuring the first cautery has not left any scars behind.
Capitol .xl.	Section XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Regarding the cautery treatment for the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture invades the joints and causes issues in the ankle's structure, indicating this by extending one foot compared to the other when placed side by side.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found within the inner bend of the leg.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then apply the cautery on the thigh above the ankle joint with circular movements, as you will be able to feel it around the area when the ankle twists and in such a way that the ankle falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And as for the cautery described earlier, its shape is similar to the cautery treatment for the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this type of cautery isn't available to you, then apply three large olive oil-soaked cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the severity of all symptoms in the entire body; and treat that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Section XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Regarding the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs at the ankle joint, which is caused by friction and moisture, you should heal it using what we have described earlier without altering its effectiveness. If this method does not work, then proceed to loosen the body of the ankle with large pills or artificial ones, or something similar; then cauterize that area accordingly.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method for applying the cautery in this case follows two methods: one using burning medicines, or a cautery using fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two known methods for this, of which one involves applying the cautery over the width of the thigh three times in triangular patterns as shown here; and make sure to achieve good depth with it.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the spacing between each cautery should be equal to the thickness of your finger, whether it's an olive-sized or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	There are four areas where you should apply the cautery to the middle part of the calf for four points.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, apply the cautery around the circle described earlier in the treatment of ankle dislocation, that is, a circle that burns all symptoms throughout the body.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is how you perform a hot cautery when pain is localized around the ankle and doesn't extend into the foot.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it does extend into the foot, then apply two cauteries on the foot over the area that contains the ankle pain; and with one cautery on the heel for four fingers' width towards the calf.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it's a knife-like cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the severity of symptoms in the body.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the ankle is so positioned that the pain extends along the bones of the foot, then apply the cautery here where you place it, doing so with three points or four or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the ankle is so positioned that pain extends up to the heel of the foot, then apply a knife-like cautery here.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And remember to avoid applying the cautery until it burns nerves or large vessels during every treatment, as this could lead to harm or constriction on your leg.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen several others who apply cautery on the heel and finish their treatment there, and heat the bedfire inflated in such a way that the swelling achieves the foot, and the fire pierces and corrupts all of the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And it leads to severe stomach fluids, resulting in death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain occurs in two parts at once, apply this method for each one accordingly.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones would say about ankle cautery, this is how it should be done: make a circle resembling iron, where the circumference equals one palm; and according to its aperture as if of a finger bone or perhaps slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle place another point; and the spacing between them equals the thickness of your foot; and make those circles twice in width; and let the length of those marks be one or two fingers, and make those marks iron decently dressed within the circles; and this is how it should look:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And ignite it in the fire until it reddens and produces sparks, then apply it to the ankle joint, pressing the leg against the side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then, apply three round cauteries in one go to that area.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then, smooth that area for three days; and cover that with bandages until the wound heals; and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	DiYS Albucasis: or children, for this kind of cautery we have used them due to the fear of examining the patient, and because we found that they look over the patient.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May this type of cautery bring relief to those who suffer from it, and find its place on the patient.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May the medicine that sticks to the cautery make you draw two hollow circles, in which you put out the fire of the door; let their length be as large as two nuts or small stones in size.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is according to the quantity of the thickness of the thing mentioned; place these under and above, so that they contain themselves among each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place your hand on the part of the water where the patient is submerged up to the waist, and place your hand over the part of the water; then take hot water and put it between the two circles, making its quality small like a small fire gradually, and keep that for one hour's worth, and let the patient chew and adjust - as if it were being burned by fire - until the chewing stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And lift your hand to the instrument and remove the hot water from all the water with lukewarm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let that be for three days and place your hand on that lump until the color of adjustment is fully changed to black, then let that be for several days, and it will run from their pus; this lasts throughout adolescence.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or chest, have them lie in a position where they contain water as is done with water equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and ash not extinguished from both parts, one third each, put them in a new vessel where the part under is pierced through with a small stick, according to the quantity that fits into their rays.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And let your hand rest under the bottom of the vessel another wave will rise, and pour live alkali and ash water over it which takes them up with one's finger, and when you compress them with your own hand for good compression, leave the vessel that gives off a clear water from the part under to the rising wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, pour it over live ash and another alkali renewed, then it will give off strong acidity, which is administered in doses for medical operations and in the cautery of other limbs, this operation is done with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines among which the cautery is performed widely, such as tea and honey and ash in salt form should be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulia recounts an operation and its cure among the ancients for which water pain and sciatic vein pain are cured, and it is beautiful to be of that kind, and I say there is no need for any other treatment, as it becomes healed in one go just as we recommend, and it makes a strong entry into banishment and sickness already from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is close to heartburn vertigo, and if vertigo is not found, take a recent fig; and mix it with a little gray and place it in water where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and tie it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for the amount of three hours or according to how much the patient's adjustment chewing lasts.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place that in the sun when the body of the patient is reddened, as soon as the pain stops and they are healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines except for their expulsion from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays has Escorides explained that when there is an artery in the goat's vein, it is cauterized; and you should give this to the patient: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, then place it between the ribs and under the belly.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take an old goat's belly and smother it in fire until charcoal is formed; then place the patient on the wool, leave them there until they stretch.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, do not stop doing this until the sensation of chewing reaches into the water and rests the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Regarding the cautery of pain in two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in the two places due to several causes, such as through impact or through striking, or through excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through infusion of wet and rough material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery should not be applied anywhere else but in this single type that is performed through the effusion of abrasive material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	When using pills for the treatment of illness in the stomach, make a similar evacuation and use those that are made to cover the area where pain is felt, specifically three lines according to the width of the affected area. Place your marks with cauterization on each line up to the point of tolerance by the patient and based on its effectiveness.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And a cautery treatment is done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, perform the cautery using three or four points of a central knee-pointed cautery as follows:
Capitol .xliii.	Capital XXXIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From the process of cautery to the commencement of glibosity.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	The causes observed for this stomach ailment in small children; and the sign of its commencement in them is when you notice an increase in their appetite along with an increase in elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find at the lower end of the spine of the back and in the buttocks that have already begun to rise above other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you perform this and wish to prohibit it, then apply the cautery as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Let the cautery cover the entire part of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, apply with a pointed cautery along the spinal circuit, two or three lines long.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Let the points be evenly spaced between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And apply treatment to the area until it is healed with what we have described.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Make sure that cautery is not administered in glibosity caused by muscle spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Capital XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the treatment for gout and joint pain with cautery.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And how gout caused by friction is treated using the method of cure and not aggravating the pain, it involves applying cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And that is why you apply cautery to that area in relation to the evacuation circuit of the joint in the hand with moist cauterization.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use olive oil, which has this form as its method:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains ascend into the thighs or to other joints, and these marks are observed, then apply the cautery on each thigh with three or four points of this olive oil cautery across its entire surface.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if moist cauterization is necessary for these types of cauterizations, then apply the cautery without pressing too hard with your hand before, only to about the circumference of the cord.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains ascend into the thigh and calf, then administer the cautery as described in our capital.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hips and it's called glibosity, then prick along the circuit of the veins as they flow, prick on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick on the circuit of the veins over every wrist and on the knuckle of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains ascend for several days to the elbows or muscles, then apply the cauterization over all parts of the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the stomach with good regulation and medicine reception, if only good regulation and steam are applied using this cautery, it will lead to healing, may God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Capital XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the treatment of ruptures with cautery.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When observing rupture in the intestines and discussing hernias opposite the surgical site from the back, and this is how they begin to be addressed, then you should instruct that the patient's food intake be suspended for a day, and use gentle causes so that the abdominal wound heals.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And guide the stomach between your hands on their back, and command that they keep their breath in until a hole is healed or the hernia appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And guide that back to your hands and test for rupture over the bones of the femur with the sign being as much like half a circle in the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And guide the application of the cautery which has this form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Let it ignite and produce sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And guide the return of the hernia or the abdominal wall to its original position, and guide their hand over the area in such a way that the hernia does not protrude.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed them with a cushion under their knees, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest to hold their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And guide the cautery onto that mark with your hand on the pointed cautery, and place that near where you perceive the femur bone in the middle of your universe; repeat this on another area if you have not succeeded in the first attempt towards the bones.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the consistency of the hernia during your cautery treatment, do not burn that hernia too much so that it does not cause death or any other serious harm to the stomach.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you use the cautery, do not touch the eyes, do not impair your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And understand that the size and measure of a child's cautery should be subtle according to their grandeur.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then care for the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage so that the heat scale from the fire can be removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for 10 days until the area and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And understand that you should feed the patient according to the duration of their healing period. This affects how much food they can take and ensures the intestine does not re-emerge due to the effort of recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And after about 10 days when it is desired to remove the aid, then administer medicine properly, and keep that person for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them work less and regain their strength with food and drink, and use strong drinks. When they follow this full recovery regimen, they will become healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will explain the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At meals, you should not allow them to eat too much at once, so you cauterize that rupture with a round-pointed cautery according to his quantity, and let him drink as if he were sick; then treat that area following what we said and do not adjust it afterwards.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already inform them that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, since it is marked by temptation:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and draw a line that you make over the width at the waist just above the rupture, and another line up top; then place your hand with a triangular cautery, yet the first cautery should be finer and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	About the cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in some limbs due to impact or percussion and the pain continues for a long time without improving with medicines, then understand that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the size and quantity of each limb for the cautery, according to its strength and development, as well as the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the patient recovers after the first cautery, then it's good; otherwise, proceed to apply another cautery; for usually, such pains are punctured on the same body part where they originate, so understand that you should use these cauterizations until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter LVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	About the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosy lesions require treatment with a cautery due to intense youth, and more so if it's caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize that area, consider if the leprosy is contagious and treat it with what we said in the division of treatment and do not exceed or fall short, fearing for the patient's health that corruption would spread throughout their body and all its components. So cauterize that area on the head using these cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another a bit below you, place your forehead at the end of the hair; and two more over both temples; and another behind, on the back of the neck or collarbone.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finish your hand with these cauteries for a short time until you notice a small pressure in the mouth, and if they're disturbed by old things, so that the expiration of large vapors is relieved for them; then cauterize over the pus according to what's needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread on the patient and is manifestly visible, understand that you should cauterize that area with those cauteries which we have said about in the head; then cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two cauteries over each major ear, and two over each cervical vertebra, and five over each rib, and one large one near the belly button, and one on the shoulder blade, and two over each arm, and one on each elbow, and two over each foot, and one over each heel, and two over the buttocks, and two over each muscle, and two on each of their toes; then cauterize that area over all the joints mentioned, and over every heel of their feet, and over the dimples of their buttocks.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard yourself from the nerves that are on the foot so as not to burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some lesions are cauterized with a cautery on the palate bone and another in the stomach opening, and another on the esophagus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And understand that the more precisely you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and less painful they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do with their senses, because their body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And understand that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as determined by the tools' specificities.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the cautery with oatmeal flour mixed with honey and another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	About the cauterization of coma or stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is paralyzed or has fallen asleep and cannot be treated with medicines and bandages, then you should cauterize that paralyzed limb using cauteries according to the size or development of the limb.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter into the inflamed area of the leg a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply that oil inside, until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some blisters are treated with cautery on certain swellings that cause pain in the limbs and feet, as well as along the spine of both sides. This affects the nerves that control that body part, and the swelling is relieved by this process.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not diagnose about that otherwise, but only those who are knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the distribution of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Regarding the treatment with cautery for those who have ulcers.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the medicines' oils, then you treat them with cautery by applying it for a little longer than usual according to the size of the area where the ulcer is located. This process heals the whiteness and color of the ulcer, and changes the color of the surrounding skin.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And apply that with a mixture of egg whites and split peas, mixed with oil rubbed on them and leaves of hyssop, or a decoction of dove's dung or of anise, from each take one part, mix all together, then place a cloth there for the area to be treated until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Regarding treatment with cautery for children.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cankers start and you want them to stop, then treat that area with a circular application of cautery as it rotates around the body.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise advise to apply the inner part of the cautery at its center; however, I do not see this happening, as I fear it might be an ulcer. I have already seen some blisters in this regard.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And the pus is treated by applying cautery around the area in a circular motion as we have said, or with localized applications of cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Regarding treatment with cautery for abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abscess takes longer to mature, which might be due to excess or the patient's old age and weakness, or because of time, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then apply localized cautery in the area around the pus point; and let it rest after this treatment so that maturation can proceed.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform the perforation with cautery, then use this form of cautery: and apply it at its center in the abscess area until the pus penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied in that place where there is pus, because it relieves the body of the arm; then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Regarding treatment with cautery for corroding (possibly referring to skin conditions or wounds that are deteriorating).
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corroding is the spreading decay in the limb, which corrodes the area like fire burns through dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see the corroding (which might refer to a decaying or spreading condition) in places that are treated with heat, then apply hot cautery needles, small and large as appropriate for those areas where there is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And treat the entire area with cautery until you eliminate all of the corrosion without causing any harm to it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And let that area rest for three days, and place on the treated spots oil mixed beforehand until all the scabs are eliminated and all corrosion is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And treat that with meat-generating oils.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If within three days the healthy meat grows in the area where there is not corruption, then it's good. But if not, then apply more cautery to the corrupted areas as needed.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corroding is treated with certain times of acute medicine, which are halfway in places that require cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, applying cautery with heat is for the gentle pus that is newly formed.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so use that when you have opportunity for it on him.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Regarding treatment with cautery of lumps and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Blisters on the patient's limbs that are called lumps, it is a large lump, deeply implanted, which affects the chest; and applying cautery in those places can be done in two ways: with hot cautery and with heated water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Apply hot cautery by heating the point slightly like that of a needle, made of iron according to its size so it can encompass the lump in its entirety and have fine margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And let that heat rest on the lump, and then move your hand around with the cautery in the circuit of the lump until the cautery reaches the depth of the lump.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it rest for three days until you start to notice a change or improvement.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then cover that with bladders filled with salt water and let the plaster rest on it for a night, until that lump has been eliminated from its root.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with meat-generating ointment until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if they do not convert and blisters occur on the surface of the body, mainly in the limbs and feet, then you should apply cautery with heated water to those areas. Use a small piece of iron or a needle to place over the lump; fill a small container with heated water and let it rest on top of the lump; then add water into the container until there's enough liquid that when squeezed by your hand, the water pressure reaches the root of the lump and draws out the water. Wait for half an hour as the body sweats due to the hot water, then remove it; once the lump has been removed from its root.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus perform those tasks while closely observing each one of them, ensuring they are all present within your body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those abscesses that arise from the roots of the claws, healing them with substances that cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Capital: 53.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Regarding the treatment of tremors through cautery.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When the cause of a tremor is due to friction on nerves or fever resulting from rubbing, or for any similar cause, then you should apply four cauteries or five in total over each rib bone; and with one cautery on each foot, and another one on the abdomen. Use an olive oil-based treatment after applying the cauteries.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor in them subsides, promoting the healing of their illness.
Capitol .lv.	Capital: 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding the treatment of burns caused by accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When burns appear in the body and form pus-filled wounds from decomposing materials; then at the moment they appear, it is necessary to treat them by applying a cautery over all parts of the ulcer. Use a fine-pointed needle dipped in mastic oil, with its tip extended into the flame; or use long reeds of rhubarb; or apply a small circular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some blisters should be cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they do not grow, and the excess is eliminated by this method. This results in healing for those affected.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be that this evacuation is done through phlebotomy nearby.
Capitol lvi.	Capital: 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Regarding the treatment of bleeding from injuries caused by an arrow's incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Blisters that occur from bleeding due to an arrow's cut should be placed over the wound which needs to be drained, or over the incision of abscesses or cautery on a member. Then proceed similarly, making it difficult to stop that bleed.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And when this happens with anything else, then you should cover the wounds from the arrow with your hand and place your thumb on those blister-like areas inside where you can stop the bleeding of the blood, ensuring it doesn't escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place small and large olive oil-based cauteries over the fire for several times, blowing over those areas that have a flame.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take a small or large one depending on the location and wound where the artery has ruptured, apply it over that vein immediately after you have stopped your bleeding, and apply the cautery until the blood flow is reduced and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And when the blood is expelled from the artery's wound while you are stopping your bleeding and removing the cautery, then take another carefully prepared needle-based cautery out of the heated cauteries, therefore do not stop until you apply this one after another until the bleeding is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And remember not to burn the nerves here, so that it doesn't bring about other harm to the patient's health.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding there, especially if the artery is large, unless you have one of four ways: or apply the cautery as we have said, or extraction if it cannot be removed, where once removed its ends are burned and the bleeding is restricted; or that it is tied with a string or tightened through strong constriction; or that they are laid upon medicinal substances whose virtue restricts the bleeding; and are strengthened by powder in a decent restraint.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Have that person who administers the decent restraint upon them with a ligature and by constriction through cloths or due to causes of burning substances and similar ones, do not apply anything but tar.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And when this happens with something else and the doctor or medicine is not present, then apply the mentioned restraint over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand to greatly tighten it within which the bleeding should be stopped from the main part of the wound, and on the arrowhead do not let it bleed; and from the arrowhead spread cold rubbing water upon it until the bleeding is congealed and thickened; then consider what needs cautery or what medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding cuts, punctures, and wounds, as well as phlebotomy and their various aspects.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already discussed in the first chapter about every illness for which a fire-based cautery is convenient and with burning medicine, as well as the occasions and causes thereof, and the necessary instruments among those required forms of cauterization; and I have organized the chapters on increasing the state of health into the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter according to that manner, so as to alleviate the desire of whoever asks for it, hence on what they have requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, understand that in this chapter it pertains to the cautery which is discussed in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that, I urge you to be in great caution, because in the operation which is part of this chapter, various blisters require evacuation involving blood where there is life due to the application onto the vein or cut on the abscess or incision of discharge or purification of the wound or removal of arrow or incision of pus and their similar actions.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their heart, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I warn you that do not let this happen to you in which you are situated, for sometimes you must handle diseases as one handles the movements of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them is one that will die from their illness and is easily death for them, and also because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and due to the longevity of their illness, and when it comes to sickness it means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is the one that gives you their account and says it, you hope for that health, and their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so do not agree with the one who shows you about this manner; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite; and do not presume any cause about this but rather a certain knowledge that verifies what you need to know, and for which there is a plausible succession.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your ailments with prediction and indication for which health is converted, in that it gives you help about acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God in you implores his understanding and does not withhold direction and protection for this is within his power.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauterizations, for treatment of head within the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you are asking for and what you need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Regarding the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness which is common in children needs delivery and when the baby's head gets stronger, its lividity manifests.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some swellings due to hidden causes which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this illness except in children; and for all those whom I saw, they die of it, and thus it is an apparent death among them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child with the head full of water, his head was always so magnificated that it couldn't bear to be placed on itself due to the size of its head, and more than that, moisture increased within that which caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either gets added between the canal and the bone, or it accumulates away from the bones on the scalp.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation is in that place if the moisture is between the canal and the bone and the pus is little, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head at a fissure in the width, and let the length of the fissure be as wide as two fingers so that the moisture flows, this is the form of pus:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And thus if the moisture is greatly increased and the pus is large, then here are two incisions according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is away from the bones, a sign of it is that you open the corners of the head from every direction and when you squeeze that in your own hand to the inner parts, water squirts out instead of hiding this.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And when you make an incision in the middle of the head at three fissures according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And during the incision, extract all the moisture; and strengthen the incisions with bandages and cushions; and on the fifth day, apply oil over it and paste it with wine and oil within the head so that its member is comforted and healed. And feed the sick with dry meat of little moisture until the body is strengthened and made well.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision that you should consider based on the size and collection of water, for some swellings are more in the occipital area, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay attention to where the swelling and accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not cut the artery and let the veins of blood flow freely, so heal the sick through this flow of blood in evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding incision into the arteries near the ears, known as thread veins.
Capitol segon.	Chapter III.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an old catarrh or pain occurs in the throat or chest, and it's too late to apply the treatment of medicines, then the best course of action is to make this incision into those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to make an incision for the sick's head that causes their sickness, prepare the place with rough cloth so that you can see the arteries, and strengthen the neck of the sick with some cloth; and consider where is the pulse; and the places above the places which are near the ears press down, and such things do not occur in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And cut on the artery with a thread, and make an incision in each one through the width of each sharp part leading to the bone, and do this considering the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the needle near your fingers and thread it through to the arteries, so that they penetrate the parts below.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And make the length of the incision two digits adjusted, so that when any vein is incised, there is a sensation at its exit during pulsation, which jumps from beat to beat.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear at the incision, then gauge the circumference of your hand for the amount of space of three digits, and prepare to try by touching it, and insert into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which gets heated with heat is a quantity of blood unharmed, and let it not heat your hand or wrist much, and all of this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the thigh and the filling of the artery of yours.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains over the bone any cause of a boil, then cut that so as not to create a carbuncle.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with plasters and with linen bandages, and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some accident causes old migraine or severe headaches, due to humidity in agriculture and the quality of those headaches on the temples, or old headaches are intense and resemble those, and are treated according to the methods of healing in medicine and this does not apply, then we have focused on these illnesses: extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the thigh raises the skin which is in the temples; and understand the artery apparent in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden even in few people due to the intensity of the heat.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden to you, then let the thigh be strengthened with some cloth; and then rub that place with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you can see the artery clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the needle of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you prick the cord with it in such a way that you reach the artery; and then let your finger rest on it to allow blood flow until you extract that at the ends of the arteries; and then remove that from the cord and uncover those tunics which are underneath, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is delicate, then wrap it around the tip of your thumb, and then cut off a part from it according to its length for which the tips are stretched and shortened, and do not allow blood flow; if they are not cut, it will not pump blood at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove the blood of the unharmed blood. Into three parts.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then consider that you secure it in two places with twice as strong ties or with cords long, and do not leave it to decay before the healing of the wound and do not allow blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut out the excess that is between two ligatures; and do this either in that moment or soon afterwards.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery inside the bone and with a surgical knife until its extremities are cut, and stay in place like this work of healing.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the thigh has fever or is of cold complex; for cautery is due to those causes that help in finishing moisture, therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And consider the extraction of arteries that you make in the old way, and have rest on your powder adequately done, and then let it be treated with dried medicines that cause the flesh to heal and with hot water until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another opening, it starts to flow blood from the artery, then you take care to reduce that blood, or with a cautery, or with the old way, and strengthen your hand until you can stop the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you, then pause your finger on the area until the blood coagulates, and coat the area with cold water until the heat subsides, and strengthen according to how it feels.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is pus in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, because you have placed both areas on the surface, and move a hot flame until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it stretches whatever is between its extremities, which are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the heat of both knives be at the same time.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if they are of varying heat compared to two knives, then it is better, as with two sharp knives close to each other, and you do not cut the flesh at speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, if there is any thickness, heat the fire in those and the flesh is cut lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and for anything lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the distance between the two knives be the size of your finger.
Capitol quart.	The head quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	From the treatment of injuries caused by sharp and acidic tears in animals.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are acidic tears, and it's the injury caused by those veins which are on the animal's forehead, and there is no cause to apply medicine for its cure, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and feels like a crawling sensation on their forehead, as if it were ants walking, and the animals' tears are exhausted, becoming moist in this way that their skin has been used up, and their eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears. The old ones would treat these injuries in this manner during such an operation, and many consider this treatment to be unbearable.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you instruct the patient to scrape their skin which is on their forehead, and then you proceed to make three equal distances incisions across the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two hands: one incision should be exactly half the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a bit less than a hand movement of the tears that are in the lacrimal region, and the third from another side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And watch out for the beginning of the veins which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space from each incision is the size of three fingers adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have one piece of sponge or dry cloth, apply it moistened with the liquid to cool down the injury.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the blade of two sharp ends, here is the form of the incision for this:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which begins from the division point within to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the chain among the two incisions near the bridge which is above the bone, and make this of the incision migrating into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then cut this blade and insert another tool in the first incision, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp part of this sharp tool on the attached muscle, incise that chain, and the other side into the bone, and insert that into the area where it reaches the migrating incision, and cut all the veins that descend from the head to the animals.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May this continuous incision reach that appearance of the chain, and proceed with this in the migrating incision between the other incisions.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the amount of fluid is enough to drain, press out the places from the compressed liquid sponge.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then pause at each incision for a short while, and place those powders on those ashes in wine and oil, and water them so that they do not develop into pus.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the ligaments and apply a large amount of hot water or vinegar, and then treat this with balm ointment in oil among others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	End of Part V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the treatment of tears caused by inflammation and from animals whose parts are inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is a catarrh in one of the veins and it continues, and sometimes from the tears of the patient they are exhausted, and their observation has been distorted, and their eyelids are ulcerated along with their eyes' skin, and at the base of the head is acute toothache followed by subsequent exhaustion, then you should know that these accidents mean that the substances and catarrh do not come from veins of parts inside proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: you instruct the patient to scratch their forehead, and then proceed to make an incision in that area at the middle of the forehead, a little bit across (and begin from the incision on the left temple into the right; and let the cut be inside the bone; and extend your hand from the temperature areas which are swollen due to chewing), inside where the bone is revealed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the liquid with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the incision with a short time or with cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen it from above with powders mixed in wine and oil to prevent pus formation.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen that and each time the pus has diminished, then prepare to scrape the bone from where it starts in their navel flesh, and then treat this with drying regiments which make the flesh of the navel, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of honeycomb and mix them together, and make a poultice from them and apply it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	End of Part VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	From the treatment of what inflames in the earlobes.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that inflame the earlobes are of four kinds: some are caused by metallic substances like lead or mercury, similar in effect to them such as iron and silver; others might be due to plant causes like dandelion or fava beans; thirdly, they could be caused by fluids, such as water and vinegar, that have a similar effect; and finally, there may be some animal origin.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when lead inflames the earlobe or some other similar cause of those causes that do not adhere to nor grow in the earlobe, place the earlobe in sunlight. If you notice lead, then distil on this with some oil that has been beaten or from sulfur, and proceed to take out its extraction, and make sneezing occur among conditions, and hold their noses whenever there's an incident of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place in the earlobe circuit some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the earlobe to the parts above, those spots swollen are due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not swollen, then administer the extraction with the tool called episiotomy scissors by this one, which is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it's swollen due to a tear, that's good; otherwise, then administer the extraction with a fine pair of scissors, where there is duplication of small veins.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it's not swollen for that reason, then make an incision and insert the tip of the cannula into the hole of the earlobe and seal around the cannula with wax and with a soothing oil so that it does not open except for the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And remove from the wound in force, those that are swollen with what we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not swollen in this manner, then take some alum or vinegar and apply that where the gallbladder is located, press those areas a little bit, place that under the tip of the nail, and then cover that with cloth appropriately placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And insert that into the earlobe for ease, then scrape the earlobe of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not swollen by all the causes we have recounted, then you should cut where the abscess or cramp might develop.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting that one is that you begin by touching the patient's vein of the phlegm and remove the touch according to the nature of it, then make that incision between your hands and convert the earlobe to the parts above, and create a small fissure in the edge of the earlobe put your thumb in the spot where you pressed them.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fissure is like the shape of the moon that reaches to the flesh, and when the flesh has healed over it, hold onto that if you can with appropriate tools; and cover that part while moving quickly on it, and heal that inside so it becomes healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause affecting the earlobe is one of those fats you suspect that inflates it, then administer treatment and extraction for it; but if you do not have control over your movements, then take a fine spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer with that the excision of that fat which is inside the earlobe.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not stop doing that when you think it's already moistened by the steam of the earlobe, place it on fat spots, and proceed to remove from those near the veins or at a gentle angle, or with incision as described here, making the extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	And in the water that enters into the earlobe cove, let the patient use sneezing while holding their breath at the beginning, and fill the patient's earlobe with some old cloth, and place it over that earlobe where there is water. If it ends up being swollen due to this, that's good; otherwise, then take small leather strips and pins according to the length of this one, heat these in the fire for a bit, and have the patient insert one of these into their earlobe hole and place another piece of cloth on top of the part of their body facing downwind, and hit it with another leather strip over the skin inside the earlobe.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not stop with the leather until all the water is swollen.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has become swollen, take paper or a reed instead,. And place one end of it into the earlobe and extend the other end into the fire so that the tip is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another reed and do this as many times until all the water is swollen, then insert that into a cannula like previously mentioned for removing the pus.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	If it's small creatures entering that earlobe, if they're in small quantities and resemble them, then treat them as we've said in the division; but if there are large ones causing an abscess inside the body cavity, then administer their extraction with tools and at a gentle angle, and the cause is pus being less severe than all other causes I've mentioned in the earlobe.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	And when it comes to extracting worms that develop in the earlobe, if you treat them with what we've said in the division and in the distillation treatment, do not abandon your treatment, instead observe the earlobe under sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you find any worm-related cause here, then extract it with tools or with fine scissors. But if there's no cause to be found, then take a cannula and make it slightly wide, like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the fine tip into the earlobe according to how much your patience can endure as long as it's causing discomfort; then suck forcefully through that tube, and do this until all the worms have become swollen.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you can't control your movements, then apply and seal around the cannula opening with wax as we've said; then administer distillations which have already been heated up in treating worms, follow this in the distillation treatment.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you have an exudation which you pour with the oils and medicines into the earlobe using this tool, like so:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it from silver or wood, lay them out straight, in which there should be a small trough, and have a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore let it come to what is in the cavity of the container here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the patient's descent point with a cloth, then apply oil to the cavity of the organ, or the juice from any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the container - that is for the ear - , then insert the rod above the cloth and press your hand into it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the organ and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is placed in the ear should already be heated by fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that the cause which you distill into the ear should not be too hot, because the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear wax blockage.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children suffer from unperforated abdominal swellings in their mothers' wombs, and this happens occasionally in some adults as well; ear wax blockage occurs inside the ear meat due to infection or from nothing in that area. This ear wax blockage sometimes happens at the entrance of the ear's passage where it cannot reach the throat, and sometimes it is outside the parts involved.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens at its entrance, where it cannot reach the throat, is in more difficult conditions for treatment for the majorities.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one where you can reach the throat, take the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it there.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see obvious obstruction, open that with a thin spatula whose shape is like this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which there is a small width has one part sharp and the other not; and the spatula is two lengths on each side so that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the blockage is due to soft flesh in the ear or its meat, then use that with fine, sharp instruments and apply it forcefully inside until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the blockage is at the entrance of the ear, then take a thin rod made of iron and heat it slightly with fire for a little bit, then place it in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have felt obstruction with what the patient feels with ease, due to hearing loss, force the pressure off it with ease; and remember not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the ear with cloth according to the width of the trough which you have wrapped in Egyptian oil; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing process. Or take some and insert it into water, grind it over its surface until it is thoroughly ground, use it; and if you find that the ear has already been swollen, then remove it while replacing it with another substance which you cover in cotton that is soaked in oil, so that the pus can drain out; and then treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there is bleeding or pus, then soak the sponge or cloth in warm water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that stops the blood flow from infection, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of adhesions that occur to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Eyelid adhesions which can happen on the eyes of some individuals are sometimes wetted, at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then use them with tweezers or forceps, and separate those with thin instruments from their roots, and then cover the areas with ground substances.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain or bleeding comes out, then you apply a cautery to those with a fine lancing instrument.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is near incisions and past healings tend to return whenever any cause of their roots remains; when they are burned with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for inflammation that occurs on the eyelids of individuals.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Inflammations on the eyelids of individuals can occur due to a certain cause that accumulates into inflammation with its strength and hardness; because of this, it is called inflammation.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an addition of large moisture on the eyelid, beneath and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So the operation here is that if you consider that inflammation proceeds from under the eyelid and swells all parts; and the cause of it is minor.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then cut across it according to its width, and then force that out from all sides with ease until you drain it, and suspend that with forceps and remove it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you do not find the beginning of it if instead pus penetrates into the eyelid little by little through an incision, then this is noted to have no cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the appearance is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and treat that until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, there will be no harm from that which with the healing of it restores and heals that.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the large inflammation declines to the inner parts inside the eyelid, then remove that inside, and take out the large inflammation with forceps, another you can choose for incisions, press all parts of it, and if the eyelid is stretched through an incision, this will not be noted to have any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with water that boils inside until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capital x.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the treatment remove the swelling above the eye of the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is gray stuff that's produced in the coverings of the eye above, and particularly affects children, it worsens the wounds of those and causes their eyes to get cloudy; and they can't look at the brightness of the sun because thus their tears gather on them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And you must talk about those often on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of theirs they leave wet eyebrows, which have already covered swelling, and the imminent formation of conjunctivitis is evident in the eye; and that when you press on the area with your own words, you feel a lump inside those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some surgical method is in this where the patient stops their head on your side, and then stops drapings of them and you create a small cut, and make a circle according to the quantity which contains pus from every part, and then stop that over that and press with your own words all around so that conjunctivitis be added inside the circle, and in the middle of that wetness you make a slit perpendicular through the tear duct, and the slit should not be larger than the one made in ophthalmotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the anterior cover that you cut entirely until you reach the conjunctiva, where after various positions process pus through a slit according to the shape of white fat.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove those with cloths that you have enveloped between your own words from the parts forward and mix them with both hands until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And watch that you don't place on the slit for when you have this, do not let pus reach the eye and remove that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not find pus at the start of the slit, then adjust in the slit a small tool so that pus can process; and remove this also as we have said; and then submerge cloths from them in water and vinegar, place these over the area and strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus they pass salt over it in the cavity of the slit, so that what remains from that wetness is.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess occurs in the area, then treat that with plaster bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Capital xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods for examining the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When on the eyelids of patients their own hair replaces their natural skin and is thick, then these cause disorders in the eye like constant tears and puffiness of the eyelids and inner eyelid tissue which can lead to destruction of the eye that we call inflammation of the eye, and treatment is done in four ways: or with a cauterizing tool using fire; or with acute medicine as it's said in the section on cauterization; or it's treated by excision and suturing; or with canals according to what I say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so cut where you place the eye's head on your own side; then convert the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it is converted, that's good; and otherwise, insert a needle in that part which contains pus from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through skin above, and that - close to the edge of the eyelid where hair grows - near the hair, and pull out the thread on top of the parts above the eyelid, and convert it into the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then make in the part inside the eyelid your hair adjusted to the wetness of the major tear duct towards the minor tear duct; and then remove this thread and place on your own eyelid small powders of pine or cloth, and then press on your eyelid with a test, and it should be like a twig of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But when you cut to see the figure according to the amount of retraction of the eyelid, which is already differentiated in humans, those are those that have been cut deeply from the large eyelid quantity according to the quantity for which the eyelid becomes swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make with this cut on both lines which you have marked, and start from the major tear duct towards the minor tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your slit is close to natural hair like it's thick as a king's beard.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the string, and then scrape off everything, and then adjust to the stitching the two lips at mouth or a thread of fine wool on each eyelid, clean up pus, and adhere that which is superfluous from threads over two eyebrows for some contagious causes, if you wish to do this, otherwise don't treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the stitching of the threads rest for three or four days, and then treat that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, let the wound and its stitching rest, then treat that with something that dries and constricts, where the eyelid is lifted you must seal the wound and support it; but stitching is better. Therefore do this as they did in ancient times.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But when there's concern about the eye, it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method for examination is this, and that there should be a figure on the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, then lift the eyelid by three threads separately according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it's not possible this way, hold the threads, and if this isn't equal, then take a needle with thread and insert that in the middle of the figure, and place the other thread near the major lacrimal sac, and the second thread next to the minor lacrimal sac, adjusting between your fingers the threads at equality, then raise your hand up to the same height as elevation, lift the whole chain on which it is applied thus as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust both lips of the wound for suture, and heal that inside which has healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If it happens that you have an abscess, start with your incision or your wound, but treat that abscess with a plaster and make it resemble the patient's skin, and apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some inflammations under the eyelid which cause its hair to fall out, then choose what you use in that of what we have said about incisions; but suture where it is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Tie up the canals as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And this is to convert the eyelid and divide the figure inside as I have recounted; then with skill make two canals or two subtle threads of which length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is more like the width of the nose.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And add each with subtlety under what excess there is of the eyelid of the eye, and strengthen the threads of each part firmly, and let that rest for a few days; so that through the constriction, the chain will die out and be rejected and fall in on itself by its own weight.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it's delayed, then cut the chain at the corners, and treat the wound inside which has healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and there are no hairs poking out.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is how you should make two threads according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And the length and width of the quantity shall neither be too much nor too little.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Regarding raising irritating hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and prickly in the eyes, then the operation for them is that you take a fine needle and hold it by the slender thread of each end and leather, and adjust their extremities finely.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be about the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And further, you can make another fine thread like this one quickly, and if you want, adjust the ends of that as well.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And place the patient's head where you are, and position it close to the sun so that your work may be seen clearly, for this is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair that requires skill, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly while extracting it above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair inwards and insert that needle into them, and make sure the hairs are one or two or three but no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand towards that place where the hair is pulled out in the middle of the eyelid through the needle with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it's pulled out in the middle and not the hair, pull out in the middle from each part with that needle where you have made that thread, beyond which pulling would be too much.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And remove that from the patient's vision, so then you will pull out in the middle and the needle, and pinch each and clean the eye, and let the discharge rest for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows back with good tissue.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter than usual, then adjust a long hair from the natural ones, and raise it to that point or let it rest until it grows out a bit more, and then raise that part.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Regarding the treatment for eyebrow plucking which occurs above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it appears in the eye as eyebrow plucking, and when contraction of the eyelid occurs upon contraction within its boundaries, or to the right or left side, due to improper healing or scarring or cautery, this is referred to as leporine. This eyebrow plucking can be natural or accidental, occurring due to healing of a wound, or scarring, or cautery, or resembling those ill effects.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method for the operation in this case is to cut that contraction and separate those eyelid edges, place a piece of linen thread between them on the inside, and tie them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not cover that you should apply the healing for the causes which dry out and tighten; so if you do this it will worsen the eyebrow plucking further than any amount of time could remedy.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for the causes that soften such as fennel, soak them in water as if you were bathing them and keep them moist with oil, or use oil of saffron which has been dissolved with some oils, immerse the linen cloth in this, and apply it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you puncture through all parts that are not consolidated according to the shape I indicated at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is merely a correction of the hernia that does not return the shape of the area according to what I indicated in front.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol. XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of hernias which is performed on the eyelid, you do it.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia which is performed on the eyelid, you do it, and it's called vertebrospinous hernia; and it can be either of a natural cause or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental one is caused by an injury, a cut, a cautery, or other similar actions.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation for this is that you take a needle with a double thread, insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal into the right one, so that the thread reaches both ends of the tissue.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the parts above on the needle and where the needle is, cut open with a wide incision.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so, if the shape of the eyelid returns according to its form, it is good; and otherwise, take hold of the thread and place that at the cut edge, then adjust the eyelid on that spot, and make the two incisions in the corner of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two incision points meet at an angle where you made the incisions between them, and make that angle so that when they gather together, it forms a figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh that much which corresponds to the edge of this, so as to straighten out the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of wool; and properly treat those with the medicines we have mentioned, and with ointments to make them heal.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the hernia must be treated by incision or suture or cautery, then you should make an incision in a flat manner on the skin of the eyelid as previously indicated.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the ointment between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the total discourse of hernia cure, when it is above or below, let this operation run in your procedure according to how it is prepared as a form of hernia, and that form is in the shape of various spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare parts in every manner that is possible for him to return the shape to its natural form or close to it, and this patient according to how they suit him with the operation and tools in their most suitable arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens in old men, make sure that the eyelid is firmly set above the white of the eye, and prohibit its ease of movement and natural actions. Therefore, it should be that you intervene at the end of this thread on the eyelid, then lift it up or extend it to a corner.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you make the adhesion cut into a subtle incision, one that is not at the point of the incisions, having it blunt enough so that the patient does not disturb the operation, and leave the incision intact to prevent the eye's sharpness from being impaired.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it removes this adhesion in ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then place in the eye salted water that you wash with; or distil it from junia dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with an ointment on it; place wool infused in egg white over the eye, and use for healing processes until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of the eyelashes and prominence of flesh in the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelash can be done in two ways, one is nervous and resembles a thin hard lump; or it's non-nervous, resembling white clotted moisture. When you touch it, if it pulls to take an inch, it is removed and the inch does not remain with it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these species do not start from the major tear duct, which gradually covers the vision and prohibits light and eye movements.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	And the way to act in an incision is that the patient places his head where it should be, and then opens their eyes, lifts the eyelid with your hand, and carefully removes the eyelash on an inch of duplication, extending it to the corners.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and intervene with one horsehair or cowhide or calf skin or similar, or double the end of the needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the eyelash, piercing that on the needle, and hold onto it with a nail; then extend it to the corners, excising from the hair where the eye ends.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And similarly follow that into the hair inside the angle of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you make the remaining cut in the edge of the tear duct with a subtle incision or small V-shaped cuts, and removes the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that through this incision there is no continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the gall is in the sun's position or by the side of the stomach, as we have said, and it should be squeezed out through the liver, which has this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And remember not to touch the peritoneum on the liver, and that it should not rupture in this, and that the pupil (eye) be pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Near the end of the injury, add a little salt or make a wound that bleeds, and let it heal inside by itself; and take care to ensure that what covers it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the gall is not nerve-filled and you can't put in the needle, or it's located under that sun position, then this type of gall heals with medicine, and is treated as I and recommend in this section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to remove that (gall), then open the space between the thighs and take out the liver carefully with this pointed tool according to this shape:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you notice that it has become thin and is mixed in with the stomach fluid, then distill from your mouth into the stomach wound that bleeds or with stomach acid or with finely chopped salt, and pour the stomach fluid inside by the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And continue with the operation inside until all that is from you has been removed, otherwise if it spreads to the stomach, then leave this, and begin treating the infected area again when it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue your operation on that according to reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The dissection of the eye's flesh, if you notice significant damage in the stomach, should be left for the sun; and dissect a part of that one by one, and do not finish the operation so as not to pierce the fluid from tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And continue with distilling stomach acid into the tear and treating it until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On dissecting the appendix and what is born from adjusted flesh in the stomach.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some wounds in the stomachs of certain beings produce raw flesh, and it is overprotected until it covers the eye, or approaches and strengthens near the eyelids, and they force their lids onto the parts far away, assembling them to touch like the bottom of a box.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation is that the stomach places its head at this location and opens the stomachs of that one, collecting all that flesh with suitable tools towards the stomach, and uses these tools with a forceps or chopsticks; then cut the flesh from the beginning until it's completely finished using scissors, and watch over not to let that substance escape while you perform your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And when you are cutting those or with the needle that we have recommended in the operation of this gall, or with small saws on which you collect beeswax according to what comes close to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And once your operation is completed and everything flesh has been removed, then fill the stomach with finely chopped salt, or distill it with stomach acid that resembles the corrosive medicines, and place on the outside of the stomach a piece of fat from an animal so that there's no spread of infected pus.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any reason for appendicitis and the pus has spread to infected pus, and you fear the spread of infected pus, then leave this stomach and treat that infected area with water that softens this infected area, and continue with your operation until it heals, and do similarly on the flesh that accidentally occurs in this type's stomach.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, make sure you allow for complete healing of the stomach from stomach acid through natural or accidental means, operate with iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until that part is suffering under this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On collecting bile in the stomach.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Bile is a type of hard veins that lie on the stomach and prohibit its operation, and slowly digest the stomach over days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the stomach where bile exists is strong and in it there is nothing else but bile, then you collect that bile.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And when you command the stomach that it places its head at this location, then suspend those veins under the sun or two depending on your judgement; and if that one is an object of double thinness according to this shape:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or is both bones gradually in a body according to this shape:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with fine tools, with subtlety, and remove the pus as soon as possible when you see those veins become full of bile and are turned.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And remember not to take the stomach to the ends of the liver; and if your operation is in the middle morning facing the sun, and if your operation is firm that you cut only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then distill into the stomach with green or red stomach acid for its acidity to corrode what has been filled with bile.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all at that time, then cover everything with what softens your pain, and leave this for several days until your pain is relieved and there's no spread of infected pus.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And continue working on it according to the motherly method until you heal.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is how the knives are:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	About reducing nasal obstruction.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat nasal congestion with a cautery or with hot medicinal ointment as per the description of the patient and if it does not heal, then there is no disease in the patient but instead cuts must be made over the abscess. You should wait for its maturation, and extract all moisture which is within him and place oil inside when its opening has been revealed and the nose can be seen.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the nose is revealed and you find corruption or darkness in your body, then you should have an instrument like this which has the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And this is called a sharp head, and it is made of iron, and its head should be rounded in the same way as an apple. It should pierce through like a needle or a fine file (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted area of the nose, and then gently rotate it with your fingers, pressing your hand little by little until you know that the corruption has been removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this is done with some incisions, and then restore the area due to drying causes and restrictive factors.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the area is consolidated and it has a good texture of flesh, and it is separated from the root of the disease and rests for 40 days without being renewed or developing pus, then you will know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then it is within the body rather than reducing the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you should uncover from behind with fire or with acute medicine, and as soon as the nose has been uncovered, you take action according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the iron is triangular-shaped, and the main part of the iron should be smoothly inserted into the extremity as shown here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that over the nose, and it should be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little beyond your elbow, and then rotate your hand around the tool until it fully penetrates the nose, and feel for the patient's face when you find an escape route through their hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	And thus restore the area with medicines that restrict and dry out, as you would with any treatment.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And when the flesh and the area endure, then the matter that exudes to the parts diffuses returns to the nose, so this is minor pus on the face.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	About reducing swelling of the cheek.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the cheek swells completely and does not result in severe discomfort or reduction, then you should uncover the face, and guide it, and place several large incisions on the neck's scarification area, ensuring proper suction; and then place a liniment on the cheek which is made of aloes and arnica, and strengthen plaster on the cheek with powdered paste.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method for powders is that you take cloths of linseed powder, each cloth being divided into four parts; and make from those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one upon the other according to the quantity which the cheek requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen them with firm linen strips; and apply the suction cups to these several times on each incision; and then leave the suction cups in place, allowing the cheek to be stretched during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Meanwhile, while the ligament is being softened, then you should have it well stretched.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And keep the ligament stretched throughout the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the cheek has already been reduced, then good is that, but if not, then continue to apply the plaster with powders and the linen strips until healing occurs.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About performing the operation for swelling of the uveal layer.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal layer, and it swells beyond the eyelids like a degree of swelling, and takes on the shape of a person due to this, and you want to incise it, then the operation on you should be as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the furrow of the uvea in the part left behind from the part above, and then place another needle with double thread from the lacrimal side, and make that penetrate and guide the first needle according to its position; and then incise the area of the double thread and lift off the part of the uvea along the path of the needle, and strengthen that with paste.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle, place wool infused in egg white on the cheek and guide it until the thread falls into the eye.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then take care of the cheek with what makes that feel comfortable until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some cuts gather from all parts within the circle of linen around the cheek adjusting swelling greatly, and then make a small puncture through the fine pin to come up at the corner of the cheek, and drain the yellowish fluid, and descend the cheek and enter soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it has healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	About the treatment of conjunctivitis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called conjunctivitis is simply an eye infection that resembles descending water, it is not the other one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to perform the operation on her is that you make the patient lie on the prepared bed and keep them straight, then take hold of their head with your hands from both sides and guide it into the area where you saw the illness spreading to the parts left, then ensure it dries without descending and keeps its position, and finally, the patient would observe these causes as they appear.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend into joy, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	You may if it is not prepared for the descent of the illness into water, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a fine needle to puncture there under the eyelid, cutting slightly on the sclera passing through the cornea's edge (into the place you see), where the illness should come out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And once it's out, then you should distill with the odor of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And treat the other causes around as it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending due to smell.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have mentioned the ingredients of water in the division and which one suits to puncture based on our declaration, then that one according to their health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then cover so that you make the patient lie between your hands on a mat and hold their smell there firmly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your left hand near the corner of their smell's eyelid, if the smell is where there's water, it's the left smell; or with your right hand, if the smell is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your right hand for taking the salve, if the smell is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the smell is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the salve near the corner for pregnancy in the fluid layer of the smell from the tear duct on one side of the nose, and carefully apply the salve towards that area while turning your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the fluid layer of the smell and feel that the salve has spread due to heat.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And cover so that the length of the salve's path to the root is the same as the distance between the pupil and the edge of the blackness, which is the corner of the smell; you will see the smell's view through the clarity of the cornea tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And apply the salve inside where the water is, then gently pull it down once or twice, and as soon as the water descends, you will see the patient lying on their side, and the salve in their smell.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And rest for a little bit; if the water has descended, then you should discontinue that action before the salve is removed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it's dried and doesn't descend, then you extract the salve gently, turn your hand little by little towards that area, and apply in water a small amount of clear salt from gemma; and with that wash the smell inside. And place the end or stop the wick or infused wool in rose oil and albumin on the smell there.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	You should take those from our time who pause about that cotton thread in the album of the oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you don't follow your salve into the smell due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some people whose smell is hard to move - then cover so that you take the thread called alberid, which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And puncture through that conjunctive tissue, and do not let your hand end at the edge, but instead ensure you have a path to follow the salve in its location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And place the salve according to what we've said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And conclude your work by ensuring the patient's good rest, where they sleep on their back in a dark room, and forbid all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And allow nature to take its course so that their essence becomes clear, and do not let their head tilt to the right or left in entirety.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And place the pillow according to their natural position by the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that in that dark room and expose the swollen eye, let them see some causes, and return the pillow on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And cover so you do this during the healing hours or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have covered, that you remove this so that water can pass slightly by great and intense examination.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If it happens that there's a boil, then cover so that you remove the smell before the seventh day, and correct that with water that softens the boil.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you finish your examination and cover over the patient's face for their breath regulation, allowing them to stay in the dark room for several days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually adapt to that darkness and converse about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that in a dark room, the student cannot regain vision for several days, so you should be eager about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already reached what some of those used in Artaq, and someone said that they make fire in Airak, where they drill through with the salve where water is drained.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen anything like this perfectly in our land, nor is it written in any of the ancient books; it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the types of madness for when one should be over those who are unaware of those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they can be caused by wood or metal specifically, and their ends are to this subtlety triangular, the sharp end like that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various types of flesh wounds, some of which cause congestion that gathers like mucus in the throat, or a polyp on the inner lining; this disease is called a polyp resembling that inner lining.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if it's flesh cancerous, discolored, of a dark color; and from it comes that the flesh is lion-like not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So in that which is in these lion-like flesh and not fraudulent or cancerous, it seems that you should have the patient lie down among their servants and expose them to the sun. Also, inhale their nostrils and pierce them with your finger in those flesh wounds.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the divided parts further away, and later when you have understood what has been mixed with a sharp thin smear under one part until you know that all flesh has been contaminated; if there is any justification for removing it from this patient's cause, then you should use this among the subtle tools to facilitate its extraction so that some justification remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If you suspect gangrene or an infected abscess, then hold this over the part that is affected; or if it's from malignant abscesses, then cauterize that within where the infection can be removed and all cavities are cleansed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And when getting in the nose near the incision add water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If you have opened the nose and there is moisture inside the palate from it, then know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture doesn't penetrate as you see, then know that inside it is flesh with pus over bones in the nostrils where the removal has not been done.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So when you see that there's some lump in him, use his moisture on the patient's mucus, and pause between each spoonful of the specified amount or measure, and guide him to eat until an end is found or another cause which might be possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this action, let him inhale his own smell so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and sit above his bowl, which many children do in school when they perform this activity, and it is a slight reason for whoever wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two ends of the string, one end that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nostril, and later apply flesh suturing to the mucus in the string, and do this until you know that the flesh is around the mucus in the string.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the string, pause in the nose near the removal of the pus lump, and do this for three days or more until all that is contaminated from the flesh corrodes.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose with a lead catheter for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you are following the cure that dries out, use this method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the tool for head purger which boils oils and medicines in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it out of silver or wood, which resembles a small opened lantern, like a small cauldron, and the shape is similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed catheter like a cane, and the tube of this tool for head purger is flat, open; which has a handle at the back of it, on which you place that when you immerse oil or whatever you want from liquids and volatile substances in it.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	These head purges are effective recipes: use castor oil, white cloverleaf, ginger, mace from the root of the saffron plant, long pepper, wormwood, and a small amount of cinnamon. Mix with whey and garlic juice, make them into pills, take one pill with warm water, and place it in the nostrils of the patient facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Regarding nasal discharges from the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Gone are the times when discharges resemble mucus in the ends of the nose, and it is magnified or observed for several days to see if there's improvement.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And when you notice this in the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the site or cautery or burning medicine where it is supposed to be located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its appearance is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider if it's hardened, hard, of dark color and with little feeling, then don't touch this with iron which is pus; that gone symptoms indicate that you should remove this pus for the great malice towards that against which this had been.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the pus is lion-like in texture and not of dark color, and it's possible to cut throughout this area, then evacuate the patient and incise this suspicious sign, and cure the site with what dries out and restrain until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suturing of the nose and lips and earlobe when continuity is dissolved by infection or scarring.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you produce a break in continuity in one of these cartilages, it is not appropriate for that operation unless in some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So take care, when you face some cause of those [conditions], consider if it is fresh infection at its source and then adjust the two lips of the wound for suture, and properly treat that inside which becomes healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity break have already separated and some is made healthy, then take care that you abrade every part of its external continuum in which there is no infection.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and apply dragon's blood powder to those areas and mix it well, then place a small amount of adhesive plaster on top of the powder for two days or three, and afterwards remove that and replace the plaster, treating inside where the filaments might detach by themselves, and treat internally wherever it becomes healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suturing is that you add the continuity or with needles as we have instructed in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the continuity with thread like this and show it to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips at their internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Infections observed in internal parts of patients' lips like hard blisters resembling goose fat, some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So take care that you turn the lips and slits of each of those hard lumps from all parts, and then fill the extraction with a mixture inside where the infection is strengthened, and afterwards wash it with vinegar and treat the area with what makes it收敛 internally, wherever it becomes healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of the gum adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Large cuts are often made on the gum that the ancients called albus. So take care that you hang that from an onion or whatever you have on hand under the cheekbones and make incisions in it. Then cut off its root, and let the healthy blood flow or remove the infection.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place something soothing over the area or other powders for收敛 or stimulatory purposes.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then make a secondary incision and burn it, where the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On tooth extraction with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth at their internal parts and those in front, and between gums, sharp edges are set, some are blackened and made citrine or yellow within which they corrupt the gum, causing the teeth to become yellow.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So take care that you place the patient between your hands and hold their head in its proper position, remove teeth showing those edges and causes like sand from where no serious cause breaks them, and do this for blackness and citrinitas and others wherever they are changed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if that is only in those at the start of tooth extraction, it's good; otherwise, then you repeat extraction on those to the next day and the second and the third until you reach your desired conclusion.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth require various shapes of drilling tools and different figures depending on how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the drillers that allow the tooth to be extracted from its internal parts are different from those that cut between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of drills must be prepared by you which I will show you shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Take care that you treat the tooth for its pain across all stages and complete the extraction of it, noting no reason to justify the swelling after its removal, which is a substance inside where relief occurs during its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient feels that tooth needing extraction, you must firmly certify which is the painful tooth, noting large swellings and pain descending on a healthy tooth, so you extract that one and immediately the pain stops when the unhealthy tooth with pain is extracted, as we have seen in operations for barbies.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore when you must be certified which is the painful tooth and know this well, then take care that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth on its surface where there might be some pus, ensuring it dissolves within the tooth's gum from all parts, and then cut it near your fingers or on fine cheekbones gradually until that breaks down.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then cut in the strength with large saw blades for good speech or burst force, hold the patient's head between your palms as long as necessary that it doesn't worsen, and carve the tooth according to rightness in a manner that doesn't break it, nor cause more pain on the unhealthy part.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it's not easily extracted, then take one of those tools, and get that under all parts with ease and apply force on removing it just as it begins.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or decayed, then when you cover that part with a cloth, press it at the end of a subtle ray to prevent it from breaking during your compression on that part; hold them there.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And when you make the incisions delicately in the scarification throughout the entire part of the gum tissue, maintain your strength so as not to tear that and damage that portion of him, return over the patient due to the mischief being more severe than his initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And remember not to do as those ignorant barbers do in their rashness and zeal when they are removing lumps; for they don't administer what we have advised. Large illnesses often come from these swollen lumps which are harder to fix than breaking them, and all the veins near them become inflamed, or some of them, or you remove that along with some bones in the jaw as we've testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after removing it, wash your mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is pus coming out like swelling, similarly when pus does this, take a quantity of garlic and apply it to the wound. If this does not work with that garlic, use a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and delicate tongs used to extract teeth at the beginning is long at the extreme end, short in the handle and thick, so that they don't bend when you use those tools.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be as in the case of thick handles where when you use them, they don't bend, and have long ends.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, with curved ends. The ends of those have teeth on them where the one inside fits into the other and is held by a strong downward pressure. Some of these ends are shaped like the bill of an ibis which has a name called ciconia, this is its strength and it has a strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On tooth extraction and the removal of fractured bones in the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is broken inside, then cover the area with your hand for about an hour or two until the place softens; and insert or apply some of those ends which are assembled like the bill of an ibis called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be made in such a way as to resemble a file or an almond.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not follow my advice with these forceps or tongs, then cover the vein and expose all the flesh, and insert the tool which has the name of an awl, it is a small lever whose form is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short handle that is thick at the end, and not be sharp so it doesn't break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the vein is successfully punctured with this way, it's good; and otherwise, help yourself to these other tools whose forms are like:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it should be triangular and have a particularly delicate end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you will have helped with this tool, which has two slopes as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other tools which precede in tooth extraction; for when it is done with this tool which resembles an eagle, here's the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular twisted or short end, which should have some thickness, and not be sharp so it doesn't break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that tools for tooth extraction are similar to other tools in this respect.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Let the skilled and subtle artisans find for themselves according to what their operation means and various illnesses; among these illnesses, there are those that the ancients would neither describe nor use proper instruments for, due to their different forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken, then place your weight on that in its location according to what is convenient for you with those tools and forceps as we have described in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with this gesture whose form is:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And have it be slightly thick, and hold or keep it in your mouth so that it doesn't dislodge or escape as long as the bone is being punctured; and then restore the place with suitable medicines afterwards.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small pus in the bone, then remove that of that pus and its darkness, and treat it inside until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural position, in which case the shape is like a ridge, especially so when it occurs in women and particularly in elderly respected ones; therefore consider: if one tooth is nearly aligned with another tooth, and it's not possible to extract or apply a remedy to that one, then leave it alone; but if it doesn't attach to any other tooth, then you should insert this tool into that space which has the following form; and it resembles a pig's snout, made of Indian iron with a very sharp end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And have your insertion at the point where you would insert that after many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and don't make it thicker than the other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is in the most extreme case to grind down, then sharpen that on an Indian steel file of which this is the form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it is all of Indian iron and the blade is sharp; and use here points like a file with which pins are made, on which the tooth is ground little by little in moist days for convenience, so that there will be no other tooth similarly sharpened and broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then draw that along at the end, and cut that with some of a razor's edge.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where part has been removed and you cut the tongue, then hollow out that within which the sharpness of that fraction should be accommodated and equalized, and fill it so that the tongue does not erode nor the word get corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Regarding the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth in front of concussion and removal through impact or from being struck, and the patient cannot hold up what is chewed, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, but your treatment did not work, then so that they do not get affected by those that turn hard in gold and not in silver, where silver goes green and for a few days you can leave it there, yet gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the tooth be in such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the form of the insertion is that you take the tooth and place twice as much as it on two healthy teeth, and gradually increase the curvature of the tooth between two broken ones, whether one or many, so that the thread reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the insertion into the part from which you started, hold your hand with ease and knowledge so that it does not get broken.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when you tighten the thread with which you are holding the tooth, do not allow the threads of the teeth to intertwine.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then use the forceps or remove them all, and add those wherever you can see them in gestures, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that it does not cause damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then straighten that one like how Romans would do it.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is displaced or broken, hold that one or those with another tooth in such a manner throughout the entire process.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is how teeth are and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, like these that are placed:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done to return one or two teeth close to each other in those places, and they have grown like we have recounted, and that they break.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not let anyone but skilled artisans and wise people do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable to use some reason of cow bones, and they are made like the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Regarding the insipidity of the tongue that appears in the tongue and inhibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that appears on your tongue in some cases or is natural as one is born with it, or accidentally happens due to injury which has already become consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth, locate its apex existing in your tongue; lift their tongue up, and then cut this nerve ligament as far as possible within the width where the tongue has returned from its recent condition.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If in that there is any hardness or knotting, and this has been made permanent due to the healing of an injury, then you remove it with force and cut through it across the width where you have cut the ligament, so as to dissolve the lump.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that there is not a cut made in the root of the flesh and that you sever here smoothly, allowing for pus to drain out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the cut with warm water or with vinegar or with a scrubbing liquid; and let the patient rest their tongue for several nights, so that it does not consolidate another lump.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If pus drains out, place a cover over the inflamed area; but if the pus does not drain, then cauterize the site with a long-lasting cautery that fits around this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let that healing proceed while taking care of the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Regarding the removal of a runny lump on your tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, small swellings appear on the tongue that resemble pustules, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function and causing inflammation in the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure for this is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and identify the pus bubble.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it has a dark color or is black and hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that which is tender.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned to whiteness with moisture, then put the forceps in, cut through a fine membrane, and cut around completely; and if pus comes out during your operation, then place a cover over this area, made of glass or something similar, so that the pus is contained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work where you have prepared for him with respect, in a place that is washed with water and salt; and care for him with the other treatment until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of pus from both ears and that which is nothing in the galea, and other blisters.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it appears in the galea, they are glands that are gathered like cotton wool, which occur outside and are called the two ears. They are named such when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they are not healed then you consider if there is pus present. If it is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of the flow of pus; first flatten that inside until it matures, then either you puncture that, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of him is delicate, then that must have been infected.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you are about to perform surgery on him, consider beforehand if the pus has rested and is ready after your operation or if it has decreased by any diminution; then let the patient lie down facing the sun, his head towards you, open his mouth, and have the servant hold his tongue between their hands with an instrument of noble motion, as such:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And make it of silver or of gold, and let it be finely made like a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press the tongue and it shows you the pus, and you place your tool over it, then take the forceps and place them in the mouth, and pull that out as far as possible from the parts.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another thing when you remove some cause of the tunics, and then pierce that with this tool which has this shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is similar to forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the opening of each one of them faces towards the other, very sharp, which is made of iron and heated.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May if this tool is not available to you, then pierce it with the needle which has this shape: And it should be sharp from one side, not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have pierced one hole, pierce the other according to this method of piercing, and rinse the patient with water afterwards.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May if there is pus drainage, rinse with decoction of the boiled water of feverfew or rue leaves and use them in the same way as for the stictic causes until the flow of pus is restricted, then treat him so that he becomes healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some blisters occur in the galea besides other blisters from those two ears, and pierce those as I have said and indicated for piercing two holes equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman for pus in the galea of her, that pus was of a dark color, with little sensation, which had already constricted the galea of her, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, she had also been forbidden to eat or drink water, she was already near death if she did not receive treatment for one day or two more.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the pus had spread so much that it was between two fingers when you could pass them through with two thumbs.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And I cut the pus out carefully and held one of their forceps, then pulled that out, and removed a large portion from him. Then I pierced where I understood to be the other hole, and forced his mouth open, then squeezed his tongue, and placed the forceps in that lump of pus.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I removed a large part from him, so there was only a little bit of pus left coming out of him.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the galea of that woman was completely restored, she started drinking water soon after, and then began to eat food. So I did not stop piercing pus from that lump for a long time, and instead, pus formed in place of it, which continued to pierce as that one lasted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I treated this way and burned the galea of her, hence after adding to the operation; then I walked around and did not know what God had done for me afterwards.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the method of piercing when it is infected with pus.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When phlegm occurs in the uvula, and it is infected with pus and is long, then it is named as a straight lump. And if there is a large and round part at its end, then it is called a bubbling lump.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	And when it is healed as we have said in the division, and your treatment does not take effect, and repeatedly there are times that pus has disappeared from him and becomes subtle, then you should consider piercing the one that has added a round lump; and if it extends to that length, and it bleeds, of dark or black color, without any sensation for him, then you must try the method of piercing him, because fear occurs in this patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you perform that according to the manner I have said about its whiteness and length, make him lie down and press his tongue with an instrument whose shape processes this action, then place the forceps in the new hole, pull that downwards and pierce it with one of the two tools which I mentioned for piercing two holes.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And choose not to introduce anything other than what is fitted to the natural conclusion of the addition, for if you introduce more from him, you would hurt his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when the incision is made, use what we have recommended in the incision of two layers, and cure it within so that it heals.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the incision, know that when using the tool in the cautery process you should calm him down. The method of cautery on him is nothing but hot water, and you place the head of the patient in your hand, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, take some water as we said in the first stage of cautery, heat that to a live state, make sure it's not too thick or too thin, fill the hollow of the tool with which this is done:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the cavity of his protrusion be filled with medicine in the same way as the cavity of a rabbit's belly, place the tool on the wound and press it, the patient lies on his back so that he can swallow or spit out saliva from his mouth due to the intrinsic medicine, so that it doesn't cause any damage to him and allows him to expel it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And press your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula for half an hour during which you see that medicine is degraded and soothed by the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, pinch and wrap it around the end of the tooth, submerge the pin in the medicine, insert the tooth into the pin in a tube so that the pin adheres to that tube. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cautery of the uvula, then let that rest until it dries and falls off about three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you feel the need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then after the cautery remove it from the uvula's circuit around the pin, and modify what is in that circuit of his medicine. Wash it with water and clean it before applying ointment, and take care internally with remedies until he heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is preserved that the incision and far from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some ulcers are cured of the uvula with this that is treated finely and with cautery and incision, which is cured by submersion in this manner: take calamus, yarrow, garlic, rue, powdered gum arabic, chamomile, vinegar, and similar herbs, adjust all these ingredients or some of them into one mixture, let them be submerged in warm water and boil; then let the mixture be strained with fine cloth over the mixture, place an iron tool heated by fire on this mixture according to this manner; it should be made of silver or gold.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And immerse the tip in the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the uvula over the pygostyle, until the uvula becomes very red.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And apply it to those red spots until they dry up, and remember that you should not perform this treatment at the onset of boils, as it would exacerbate in the boil. Do not do this, but rather declare the boil's declaration by cauterization for him.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this tool at your disposal, then take a cane and make a small opening in his extremity with it, so that the patient's mouth is closed, as the tip of the onion prevents steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On Extracting Thorns and What St黏hes in the Wound, and Other Causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Red spots stick in the wound or thorn of a beast or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So when you remove what is obvious from those, on which your eyes look, and you press the tongue against the tool in front of yourself, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not visible and is hidden in the throat, know that you should make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach; or if a strong cause is attached to the throat, it will be removed by vomiting. Or let him swallow a piece of bread or grated lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried marine sponge, wring it well with water, and give that to him to swallow; then when it reaches the place where thorns are located, it will come out on its own.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a wriggler and drink it with thickened water, let it be inside you and gently remove it; or take a pin and insert it slightly and then pull it out gradually.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If they do not come out from those causes as we have mentioned, then use an iron tool according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be slightly thicker than a small one, and at its end there is an indentation which you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And have his head raised upwards, and beware of touching his bone in the throat, for it will cause him pain or make that bone or thorn come out, or you should guide that bone by your hand if it is a doctor.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that patient must enter into it with honey, through his knowledge of the place of the attached cause and presses it in the belly, and takes his hand to the instrument among them, all according to the amount which is prepared inside him while he is being drilled.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter xxx-nine.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of a tumor attached to the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the gallbladder is treated with what we have discussed in the section on treatment and medicines that do not respond, consider this regarding the gallbladder of the patient under the sun, because you have understood the tongue of him by the tool which we recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you turn the tumor, extract it from the bile or with subtle means underneath appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it's not possible for you to extract from there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gallbladder of the patient, and place near the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron rod, and do this several times (until the tumor is dead and comes out of the gallbladder) and keep the patient entirely off water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And take a pitcher full of water, make an incision in that place for him, and wash his mouth with that; and do not let any cause pass through that one until you change the water once every hour from his hand, until he feels the water as soon as it comes.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it has not been drilled in the way we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with garlic or with castor oil by the tool that we recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and let it work its effects.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation in fumigation is to take a vessel with charcoal ashes and the vessel should be covered with a cloth in the middle of which there's an opening, and place the tip of the tool inside this opening; and conduct the fumigation above; and have the patient put his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the tumor, as soon as he feels it.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he doesn't feel it, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and soups, and avoid water, and it is necessary that this regimen be properly carried out.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the tool on which gallbladder tumors are treated when they are seen; it is somewhat similar to forceps like these, except when it's in his body at some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	It is flat on the gallbladder, and the end of it resembles the beak of a stork that is handled, in which it is filed by grinding stone, so that when you grasp any cause, that does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	It is the summary of the discourse concerning swellings and in the section about them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Swellings are special cases, of bodily manners, according to what is recalled about them, from each in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in piercing and section of them by two manners, from which the one is through the essence of swellings themselves; and because we take from moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is near the places where accidents occur in the body, whether an swelling occurs in the head it's another case of a swelling that happens in the anus; and a swelling at a meaty location is another from one occurring at a joint; and each has its own procedure for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some swellings cover those which are not pierced but rather wait until the healing has matured in them or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other swellings cover those that are pricked when they cross, and do not mature according to their completion, such as swellings near joints, where an swelling when it approaches a joint, the being of him is prolonged until you place what is in his circuit, and hardens his organs or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it's a swelling near the main body part, and if you delay the piercing of it until its maturation is not complete for the main body part; or it's close to the anus, therefore pierce the un-matured one; and does not cover when you prick across due to incomplete digestion, but that which is close to the anus, so that it doesn't affect his organs and is elongated inside parts of the anus, creating a fistula, or that which is made at the end of him that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you cover when you know the time for piercing the swelling, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it has matured when there's a reduction of pain and the cessation of fever, and near the decrease in sweating and pulse rate, and the sharpness of the head of the swelling, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that you should pierce it at the site of pus left by the swelling and pus coming from the treatment of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing should be at the length of flesh or body, if swellings are in parts of the limbs or feet, and in areas of scars, on nerve cords, blood vessels; and, after all, everywhere evenly where there is no reflection; for those that reflect, use piercing according to that limb.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshly location, then it is that you should confirm the digestion of him within the puncture until his poor's body and the hard mixture are prolonged throughout and strengthen his weakened lips and depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	As for such abscesses, you should puncture them according to the size of the flesh or the body's need, or according to which part the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And know how to administer a small puncture, and for large abscesses, a larger and wider one according to the variety of sizes of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And for other abscesses where the canal is contained and sealed, when it's done like that with bread, the treatment should continue as before, just as what happens in too many dublet and bobe.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And for those that are incised at a junction with three angles; and for those where the incision is made like a figure of thistle leaf, as in the abscesses of the gout.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And for them, it is administered round sections and lunar sections, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	As for that which lacks a depth like superficial abscesses, you should puncture it at the superficial point or only flatly.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is thick and has already collected healthy pus, you should puncture it but don't worry about removing all the dirt at once; take out some part of it, then let the abscess settle overnight, then remove a larger part, and proceed to make incisions gradually as needed until there is an open passage.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is of old age or vigor, or a woman in pregnancy, or a child small, or an elderly person in decay; when the animal spirit's bile has dissolved with the release of pus, and fortifies the patient, then you should operate them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be vigilant in this chapter with great caution, and when you puncture the places of these abscesses, be sure to clean them and assess whether the pus from the abscess is little, or a flat section, then administer those remedies internally or locally; and if the abscess is large, and the incision's wounds are hard, then it's that you should use force when each pull enters until they reach their time.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess an incision is made or it becomes concave within the channel, then you should complete it with local wax or silk thread, as when you tear bread or cloths, considering moisture; strengthen that from the third day onward; and proceed to process it and heal the area under the moisture until it is cured.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If during your operation you experience the discharge of pus, then you should administer water baths and vinegar together in those with which you soak a cloth made from linen, and place that over the area where the blood flows.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the discharge of blood continues, then it's that you should provide treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in local areas of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it's during winter, and the location of the abscess is in a place with nerves, then you should soak powders in vinegar and oil, and place those over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it's in summer, and the areas are fleshly, then you should place ground powders in water or oil, or vinegar and oil, all of which should be rubbed until the third day, as we have said, and from there you should release the abscess and clean that area and administer treatments suitable for him until he is cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what's necessary in knowing the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already explained for all abscesses on how the treatment proceeds through individual chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Regarding the sections of abscesses that occur in the canal of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the canal of the head are small abscesses, which have special nodes that contain membranes peculiar to them; and the characteristics of their lumps.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they have pangs, and those that contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And there are those that contain moisture resembling dust, and they resemble them; and there are those that are scaly, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should approach the extraction of those without causing resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you squeeze them with an instrument which resembles this one somewhat, which is called a probe, so that you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is moisture, then divide that in sections along its length according to the superficial section like this:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Start from the section of line .B. between the lines of .G. As moisture is evacuated, then you remove that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, should the returns be too frequent if there's any cause left over.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the area in Egyptian ointment if it's available, or otherwise in water and salt; fill that with pus and leave it for another day, where you scrape away everything that gets dissolved from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply Egyptian oil on that part twice and thoroughly if it irritates you, understanding that there should be no cause for that layer; then treat the wound with oil until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there's an abscess with fatty nodes, then you should incise that part in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	Make a cross-shaped section, cut into the area between the two lips of the section and proceed to drain it from all directions, and exert your strength in removing the tissue which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you are facing a contradiction when sewing up, then do as I told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do when dealing with an abscess on the section and during the process of healing as we have told you; and if the abscess area is a little swollen, it's due to minor inflammation and a lack of moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these abscesses are of this kind found in the head in certain men who lack moisture; the cause is that I incised on an abscess in the head of an old woman and squeezed it like a hard, rough, white pimple, which couldn't be drained, and if someone had hit that area, they would have gotten infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And in other abscesses, accidents at the head are not this one, like those on the heads of children and the redness around the ears, but the area of these all is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation for those below their part, by this you will alleviate the body of the sick in these lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And treat those with what is suitable for the process of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Head Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On section of scrophulas which occur in the collar area.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses are observed to occur in the collar and underarm area, as well as in the axillae; sometimes they also occur in other body parts.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the collar are, these are masses that are generated among them, and all scrophula of those is within their own tissue, just as in the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrophula are lumps, some of which contain moisture, and others which are malicious not yielding to healing.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one where you use good judgment in the Touchment, whose color is indicative of the color of the cord and is visible throughout, it does not adhere to the nerve in the collar or to the veins or to the suture line. It is not a lump, as when you incise it from the dry superficial area of the part above until the part below on the line of .G. within the line of .B., and burn it completely; spread the lips of the cord with oil, or with powdered oil if needed, just like we did in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the cutting tool is not sharp enough and you cannot control it during incision or if it causes discomfort to the patient, then do not incise what is unnecessary; if you were to incise a vein or suture line, preventing yourself from continuing with your operation would be required, so in that case stop the bleeding and apply soothing powders which leave traces of inflammation, strengthen the wound, leave it where the irritation of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes softened, and then begin to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood has been drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	And return to your operation once you have fulfilled that.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire if there is any cause for the other small scrophula, so you should incise and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the area of a large vein, then do not incise that scrophula from its area.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you proceed, hold that with a firm grip and let it fall naturally by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with an old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and treat that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the whole of that scrophula, then proceed by adjusting the two lips of the wound and cut until there is nothing left of any superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	And if you find that there is excess pus due to the size of the scrophula, proceed by understanding where to incise it, extract that and administer suturing as was said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrophulas that contain moisture, puncture it with a superficial incision at the point where you see its maturation place, and stop puncturing until you reach the bottom pus of the body as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then perform puncturing, use oil and do it like the others, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the inflammation.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you find that the wound has already been cleaned, then treat it with healing flesh oil until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Head Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On section of the head of an abscess that occurs in the groin area.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancient people treated this section under the skin, and nobody in our land has seen that being done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men there is a bend, where the removal of the epididymis should be avoided, because otherwise it might happen in youth when all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have pus pockets in the mouth or ear canal or both the ears, when the illness is not in the hair, it should be avoided to reach the section of the epididymis to prevent the loss which happens through perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want this, that we incise the epididymis leaving three circles of the epididymis' circles, or four at small size by width in the one that is between two circles according to quantity, so the section should be in the middle not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for the section which is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of his are lymphatic.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is hesitant, proceed thus that he extends the ear canal to the notch, and then opens the duct into which it penetrates, but beware of the blood vessels if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the skin as we have counted; and it is significant on the section of the canal by the flame which comes from that eruption at this which is of his eruption and through the removal of the pus.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound opened for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the time is ripe for the feared perforation, add two flaps of the canal's wound, and that alone is the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it becomes healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Diwaccas says that the summ of the speech which we have recounted, explanation is not but you see that some of those pus pockets have already expanded through the ear canal of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and his hand was cut off, and others would incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the area of the wound for a breath or two, and is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason command to keep the wound opened until it consumes the mischief of the illness; and this mischief lasts three days; and then from that point command thus on the wound, and treat it until it becomes healthy.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that one of the servants put a coteau in her ear canal and incised a part of the lung's membrane, and I was called to treat him, and behaved as if it were the cry of the dead, and uncovered the wound and smelled the pus which was inside the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So I confessed that it had not incised a vein or artery, and the wind came out of the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And don't punish the servant unless in the pus, and after some days return to treating his arrangements.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And I say that there is no fear at the section of the epididymis.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about abscesses that occur outside the ear canal, which is called the ear canal hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess named ear canal hernia is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and moves in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no need to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways of which one is like fatty lumps, and the other way is like abscesses that are made by blockage of an artery, and there is fear in that.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And don't assume that it makes any difference like iron rather than just when it's small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you prepare that and investigate it as described, and if you find it resembling fatty lumps, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise it like lumps, and extract it with what is inside of its skin and emulsify; and otherwise, then it should be thoroughly examined in every way, and treated accordingly until it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of types of lumps.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the lumps there are various species, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should consider this difference between a lump and an ulcer to avoid confusion.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that for an ulcer it is hotness and fever and violent pains during which the boiling of excess is quenched; and the completion of putrefaction is when the latter ceases to have fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	In a lump there is not hotness or fever or pain, and contains this lymph which is of the body's own.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a boil and is made like an abscess, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, either fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And when you reach the treatment of a lump, that you expel it and investigate it at its beginning towards the instrument which is called an introdus, according to what comes in its form in the chapter which is similar to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of questioning for pus and all kinds of nodes, you take this instrument and insert it into the wet spot which you find in the sore, then you will turn your fingers gradually inside until you know that the instrument has penetrated the chain.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally guide your hand according to the size of the sore, then extract the pus and observe what is left in the trace where it was.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if it is a flowing wetness, of any color, then you incise into the superficial section as I have said in other sores.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no wetness at the trace of the pus, then you will know that it is greasy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it according to this shape on the surface:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Do this as we have taught you, and suspend that with forceps, then scrape the chain from all sides with ease, and if possible, keep the skin or bag over that area and remove that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and in this case, you will have to remove it with its parts without causing any damage.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	And if something causes it to open again, a little or too much, the node will return according to the custom.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that something large or small opens from it, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound. Place over that which is a pus sore cautery, and treat the rest of the treatment until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you cut both of its lips and treat that which is enclosed.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if there is a pulsating vein opposite it, or not pulsating, then you should apply and heat the area of that which is split by the glass and straighten that stretch for two days or three until the wound heals and stops the bubbling of the blood; then return to cut what is torn from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instrument necessary for sectioning and puncturing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the surgical instruments, and they consist of three kinds. Among those there is a large one, another that is of medium size, and another that is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large surgical tool is like this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized surgical tool is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small surgical tool is like this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Let them be made of iron, silver, or lead, with appropriate ends that allow me to insert the tool into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experiments, they are named by numbers, and one of those is called bloodletting.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds, among which one is large, another is medium-sized, and the last is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experiment, its shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium-sized experiment, its shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experiment, its shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Let them be for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and tumors so that they get inside those ones from bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They are round tools, thick, large, like big needles with which the cords are sewn on, and they are made of iron, copper, or silver. The best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are also the experiments of black feathers, which should be used to make those fistulas open in their cavities where reflections occur, that they are reflected by their lightness onto those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	They come in three types; some of them are long, others medium-sized, and the rest short, depending on the size of the diameter of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large lead experiment:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the medium-sized lead experiment:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small lead experiment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the forceps are of special kinds. Among those there are some simple ones that have only one curvature and come in three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have tongs from them, which also come in three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And there are forceps with two curves among them, and these too come in three varieties.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have forceps with three curves among them, and these also come in three different types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary for their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a simple large stone, it's shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of an intermediate-sized stone:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple stone, its shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of an abnormal large stone:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of an intermediate-sized abnormal stone, its shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small abnormal stone, its shape:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large stone with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of an intermediate-sized stone with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small stone with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large stone with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an intermediate-sized stone with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small stone with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels according to which they cut and remove swellings and abscesses, and they are of three types; among them, one is large, intermediate-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the intermediate scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those are sharp for making incisions, while the other ends are blunt and not pressed in such a manner but rather are used gently when scraping swellings during an operation to avoid damaging a vein or nerve. For these actions provide relief and tranquility for the patient, achieving a smooth process that avoids harming the area around the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of needles, they come in three types: large, intermediate-sized, and small, just like thorns.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large needle:
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of an intermediate needle:
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of a small needle:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from reed and resemble arrows on which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the tip there's a punctured area hidden by wax and under that is a groove leading inward and outward. You can use it as you see fit, just like when observing.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which hide between your fingers you perform the incision on the abscesses without feeling the pain, and they come in three types: large, intermediate-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those tools:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of suction cups that remove the discharge from disease are of three types: large, intermediate-sized, and small. These are their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made from reed like a citrus fruit, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these types of suction cups in large, intermediate-sized and small sizes, so that with those you can quickly remove disease discharge when necessary, and later when you first started medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to remove disease throughout the body, but only in fatty areas. Like those fatty lumps on the buttocks and thighs, and on the elbows, breasts, nipples, belly and testicles, they resemble those fatty lumps in humans.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some operations are done with those instruments or small points resembling thorns according to this shape; when done through phlebotomy, or when damaging a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some operations are round ones as per this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	About the treatment of men's breasts which are assembled by females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some procedures cause the enlargement of men's breasts as they start to become fatty, and consequently make the breasts swell, similar to the breasts of females. We should strongly discourage such practices, keeping a safe distance.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who undergo this treatment, ensure that you puncture them according to this form at the lunar section, within the line of B. to the line of G., and then scrape off all roughness, fill in the wound with a reddish ointment medicine, adjust both edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it internally so that it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast droops towards those sides and becomes softer due to its size as in females, then it should be cut into two halves containing pus inside them, at two sections resembling a lunar shape. Each one should be contained within the other of these halves with the longer line including the shorter one according to this form where line B. meets line G. Then scrape off the ridge that is between the edges of the wound and remove any swelling. Apply whatever was mentioned about suturing and powders necessary for internal treatment until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the puncture according to what needs to be punctured for the discomfort of the patient and disease discharge, then you should apply the wound with a wet compress submerged in corrosive ointment and treat it internally while that corrodes away the fatty tissue, and then treat it internally until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About puncturing abscesses that cause touch sensitivity.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that cause touch sensitivity are of the species of scrofulas, thorns, which have a skin layer that is removed.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those that contain moisture; and about the ones that contain moisture, you should puncture them according to this lunar section figure: from line G. to line B. And after all that is in the abscess has been removed during treatment, then leave it covered with a cloth for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then keep applying and treating the affected area with suitable ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is from the glands or in the case of scrofula, then you cut on that area as we have said in the section about scrofula, equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound extends into areas that can spread pus, then administer with the cautery according to what we have explained earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the arrow is broken and the wound heals above it, then pus abscess occurs. And the signs by which one can know that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when the abscess is from an arrow, it is long and extends into the core of the body; and when you press on the abscess at your instructions, there is a hissing sensation felt in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from a vein shows its redness outwardly.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And this section concerns this abscess, especially in those with the symptoms, and in anginas, and in the neck, and in localized body pains; it is large, so iron treatment must be avoided, and that which is at the extremities, or at the head, must also be treated carefully.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	About the one that is due to inflammation of the outlet of the artery, cut longitudinally in the wound section; and then suture the area with thread and locate the arrow, removing it from under the layers where it has been exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then work on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the arrow with a double metal band at two points - which causes you to feel your strength during the removal of both arrows as practiced by the Templars.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then pinch the spot that is between two ligaments within the space where the disease affects all of it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then apply treatment in the place where pus is generated within the area where the ligaments are; and continue treating that with suitable ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it's an abscess due to vein section, then cover that part of the abscess with your hand in such a way that you can reach it from your possible position near the abscess on the body, and then insert the needle at the place where you had held your hand. And make it penetrate; and have that filament double within where you will extract that from the other side, and then tie up that abscess with both ligaments as I have told you in the ligament of an apple4 of two parts each on the extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert metal at that needle where you have all of the abscess, and make sure to cover the tip of the first needle before insertion, and strengthen your metals in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then dry the abscess in the middle of it until you reach what is inside, so then you cut off the excess of the wound, and leave what sticks to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place the powder which you have submerged in oil and vinegar over it, and continue treating with baths and ointments until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	In the same way that abscesses occur in arteries and veins, they also occur in nerves when there is a compression or overuse injury, by analogy.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the same treatment is done in the areas around the joints or at the heel, or anywhere where there might be swelling.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it's a heavy abscess, and resembles the color of the other body, and is at the major places of its dispositions, and when stretched against vehemence, feels like a faintness in the patient.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that extends into the core of the body, and by itself causes the wound to heal, and it swells everywhere, and does not move in front or behind parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is at the joints should not be treated with iron, for strong blood will engender contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Apply that which is in the head or forehead by making a cut across it.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it's a small abscess, then apply that at the corners and remove that from the corners.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend that with thread, scrape that area, and stop that bleeding; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 50.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Section on the section of abscess which occurs from disease affecting the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Notice the signs of diseased stomach which manifest in the abdomens of those and in other parts of the bodies of those afflicted with diseases that are likened to fungi, among which the root is fine while the head of that is thick; already those tissues of those have changed, and it belongs to those which are small, and it belongs to those which are greatly magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one where in the stomach of that person were two parts which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine tissue.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the tissues of those were inverted and would tear open, with dampness continuously flowing from that area.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I enter those and cut them in each foot up to eighteen inches. And the other up to six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation during their recovery, if their body is wet, and the color of their skin is white, wet, with a slight reddening; then you should cut up to the middle line on them, and apply heat near your presence when you see any pus. You must remove that section containing the infection. And if there's still pus after this, use heat treatment on it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the body puffy and fearful, avoid cutting with iron; rather, take lead that has recently been heated, and apply heat to that area. The method of doing this is as we have said; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to apply heat with a large amount of lead inside it, until it is removed and falls out from its own effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if that area is reddened, then in its operation there are some causes of fear and panic, especially in the case when it's located in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you might remove the infection from there, and then heat treat it so that it doesn't return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And afterwards, care for that place until the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And remember that you should not cut anything with a dark color, little sensation, and requiring careful observation; for such things are likely to be cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come back with more reminders about this shortly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	About the treatment of inflammation around the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Inflammation around the navel is caused by various factors; either due to fissures on the belly, which is above the stomach and when this skin or the intestine stretches according to what happens in other ruptures; or because of infection that flows through veins or arteries as mentioned before, or due to restricted wind circulation within.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it's due to a tear in the stomach wall and tearing of the tissue, then the color of the pus resembles the body's color; there is pain and fever, and symptoms appear from various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that area is as we described earlier, with more intense variability. As you press that on your fingers, it disappears and then returns; and it becomes softer under your touch, becoming magnificently inflamed and vigorous work must be done.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if due to dampness, then it's painful and doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if due to infection, then these signs appear, the pus turns black and declines in quantity.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it's caused by flesh damage, then the pus is heavy, thick, and hard, forming according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's due to wind congestion, then touching that area feels painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And when performing the operation for this, you should consider if the inflammation around the navel is due to infection in the artery or vein, or due to wind congestion; you should avoid treating it here because fear and panic are involved just as we taught you about the pus caused by arteries and veins in Chapter 1.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the inflammation around the navel is due to an intestine or tissue, then you should order that the body hold still and be extended. Then feel all around the navel area, and command it to lie face up between your hands. Also encircle it with a middle line in the navel circuit at the spot where you felt during examination; extend the surface of pus further upwards towards both sides from an inch or more; then apply strong heat or cold near that circuit.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then cut open the center of the pus area above the membrane and insert your fingers into that spot; if you find or watch it through the membrane, then remove it immediately and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found or torn the tissue, then take that using an inch; cut away any excess from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it's opposite to your artery or vein, then circle that area, and proceed with your operation again; take two needles and place them in those strong points, insert the needles into the circuit around the pus where you have done previously, doing this in a cross-like manner, letting them penetrate. And strengthen the pus at four parts above the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to, leave the needles in place and let that area with stretched flesh fall naturally by itself; or cut it when it becomes thinner and puts pressure on the skin, then take care of that using ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the inflammation around the navel is due to flesh damage or dampness in it, then you should remove the pus as we have said and get rid of the infection or dampness that you find there, then take care of that using remedies until it heals and stabilizes the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	About the treatment of inflammation.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have previously discussed the types of inflammation and how they are treated with medicine, noting that treatment with iron should not lead to ulcers. We also talked about inflammation caused by the negligence and carelessness in treating it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And it was said by the ancients that some cramps can occur in places where their eradication is possible, such as in the head which is found in the breasts or buttocks and similar to parts of the body allocated for extraction, especially when they start small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and is severe, do not blame yourself for them, because I cannot cure anyone of that illness nor have I seen another, nor has it reached this.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for you is as we have said, that you should proceed and leave the patient clean of black bile, remove some cramps, and then treat it if there are obvious signs of disturbance.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient for surgery in the preparation where the operation is located, and provide with tongs that reach to it; and make a concave from all sides on the cord until the excision within does not damage any cause of your reasons.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not make any pus larger, and squeeze the areas, and remove the large blood with your hand or an instrument where it is possible among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if your blood flow is in large amounts and it stops the circulation of veins or arteries, then apply a cautery to that inside which the blood flow has ceased, and afterwards treat that with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitulum Livum.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division about the species of dropsy from water and the signs for each species. For their treatment, we use medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that one which is cured with iron is none other than the species of simple heat, and it should not be approximated to the species of tympanicus or the species of dropsy, for this one is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of dropsy from tympanicus with medicines and your treatment doesn't seem effective, then consider this: if the patient has already become weak or if it is another disease along with that other dropsy, such as coughing or abdominal pain, among others, in which case fear lies with this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you find the patient suffering from excess vitality, and there is no other illness but just dropsy in them, not young or old, then the way of performing surgery for this is that you raise the patient between your hands, and take care of it properly with their hands, push out their abdomen while they are submerged in water, expel the water from the corner of their mouth, and take a needle spine according to this shape:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Let it be of two parts being sharp, with an acute end like a needle; however, it should be somewhat shorter than that, gradually, for when performing surgery on this matter, do not enter into the intestine, and make sure to stop it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the development of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, in which case you should move away from the navel by three fingers' width to the sides, on the right side above the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the development of dropsy is due to an illness in the stomach, then your examination should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the origin of the issue is due to food, then your examination should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And don't let your examination be on the side where the patient wants to lie down, for fear that the excesses might flow towards that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then puncture the entire length of the needle with an instrument, and intervene in that section, lift your hand between the needle and the anus, scrape that area; and if it's as much as a fingernail or roughly.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture the anus so that the needle reaches the place where you want to empty it, which is the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or copper, in which the lowest part of it has a small needle, and on its sides are three needles: two from one side and one from the other side; and the tip is cut like a feather according to this manner:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the tip of it that is closer to the water source is a ring. When the instrument reaches the water, then immediately rise upon it, thus evacuate some water halfway in the mouth. If you evacuate more than this during an hour, it weakens the patient through the resolution of their animal spirit, or they might suffer from coma leading to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Remove from that according to the amount of virtue in him and according to what you understand from the disposition of the patient's body, as well as the meaning of his pulse and the goodness of his life.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then extract the instrument, and drain the water which causes this; it is often retained by the block which drains what is above the kidney, about which you should puncture it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And apply the instrument to the other side on another day if you observe that the patient tolerates this, and drain a small amount of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and refrain from any error so that it does not evaporate any of the water but just a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient's condition, and drain a large amount of water, then treat that with sand burial, sweat in a bath, and long exposure to sunlight; and treat that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply the cautery to the stomach, and clean up and prepare near the water extraction, according to what I have recounted in what has been mentioned before.
Capitol .lv.	It seems like "Capitol" is a proper noun or maybe an error as it doesn't fit into the context of medieval medical treatise. Without additional information about its specific use in this text, there's not much more to translate or comment on. If it were referring to a place, such as "The Capitol," in the context of medieval times, it might be akin to a governmental or judicial center which could relate to laws and regulations concerning health and medicine at that time. However, without further context, this is speculative.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the treatment of children who are born with un perforated bladder opening.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children's veins flow from their mother's womb, and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it sticks straight or is not in its proper location).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So, at the moment of birth, make incisions to facilitate the passage and under a subtle pressure according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And apply a small lead wire to the wound and hold it there for three days or until healing.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, let them urinate; and then return that (the situation or condition).
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not close this (meaning the opening or wound).
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	And that which comes out of where the lead wire is stuck should be treated with a lead wire as we have said, for too many days before it gets bigger.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And those in which there is lead not in its place, they are led, the cause of this being from those, that which is born and whose lead is you must bring to the end of the head of the penis so that it cannot urinate inside; as it raises the penis with his hand above; and it is not for his generation, because his semen cannot reach the mother according to its direction, and it is a disease stuck in place.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation in him is that the disease be laid above his two, and then extend the head of the penis from him with your left hand with a strong extraction, and cut off the head of the cap of the penis at the location of the prepuce with an sharp knife, as if it were done by feathering, or any part you do not recognize, so that the middle of his scrotum looks like the head of the penis and that the lead falls into the middle place according to this.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember that in your operation of pus discharge, which wounds occur here; pause for him at this where you cut the pus, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	"Capitol lvi." appears to be a reference or title related to section 56 in what seems like an organized document or text, possibly a medical treatise. Without specific context about how this was used and where exactly it fits within the larger work, it's difficult to provide more detailed information or translation. If this is part of a structured list or numbering system for chapters, sections, or steps of treatment, then "Capitol lvi" would indicate that this text or action corresponds to section fifty-sixth in the sequence.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Regarding the whitening that occurs on the foreskin in the head of the penis and discoloration, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin at the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	These whitening phenomena occur in the penis and are signs of fibrous growth.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant, and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant: you should suspend it with a fine string and remove that until all is gone; then apply Egyptian ointment on that spot submerged in the middle; and then treat that with clear ointment until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the whitening is malignant, by its coloration, then you should apply the cautery near the incision of it and its proportion.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if whitening is in the foreskin of the head of the penis without circumcision, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the whitening which is inside at the beginning until it consolidates; and then you treat that outwardly, when you treat that period, it may not be guaranteed that it will not get stuck.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it also happens in the genital region and foreskin with blackness and corruption, so you should remove all that is already degraded and that wants to corrupt or that has already corrupted; then draw a line over this area about this mixture, which is treated with flour made from poppy seeds and crushed grains of mustard and pepper.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat that with the other treatment until it heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is discharge of pus, then apply lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Lunar cauteries are done in two consecutive times, that is, during pus discharge and when the wound becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and totally destroyed in that moment, then dig an opening into the meat of the foreskin with a lead tube so that the patient can urinate through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion happens only in that which contains the foreskin, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to infection or abscess) dig out with an oblique cut while making the ligament dissolve completely and release the entire head of the penis.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove them precisely, then dig that you incise with an oblique cut from the head of the penis and foreskin area, and when the foreskin, which is delicate, becomes easily pierced due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis by a strip of its subtlety, which has already been rubbed with water so that it does not adhere to another area.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be treated with a styptic stick until it is hardened.
Capitol .lvii.	Head 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Chapter 57: On the development of children and on the treatment of what happens with those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution like other diseases: rather, it is more about our operation and our will, and in the case of children specifically, it is necessary that we dedicate to this better surgery and method with less loss suffered for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Thus, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on all free men, where they do not use laws for these, but rather due to our acquisition through experience, I have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and castration on testicles and on thumbs; and they use ligament for the penis and excision for the nails.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and did not find better castration on thumbs, with ligament on the penis as in castration like nails, where the pus escapes more above, where the foreskin has two tunics, and leaves a layer below, and it is easily torn to other excisions and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the castration which is performed by artisans and is manual, as those blacksmiths do, it is not guaranteed that the excision of the tip of the male organ occurs, for it easily enters the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Similarly in surgery on nails, easily rust sets and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and large infections occur in such manner that they do not require castration, I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The advantages of castration that is done with knives and ligaments on the penis, I discovered through my own experience, where the knives have a proportional excision, thus their sharpness above is as great as the sharpness below; hence when you press your hand it has two sharpnesses, and you cut according to a comparison in one moment; and it is done compression of the penis on a figure containing the foreskin from every side, at which there are no errors.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first way of the operation is that you make the child stand up considerably if it's those that I understand to be small ones, so you don't do anything but tie the penis in the foreskin only and leave him like that for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in every way possible of what he receives with his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have him stand between your hands well prepared, and let it not exceed three minutes; hide the knives in your hand or leave them by your side, so that the child does not see those or any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the penis of him and blow in the foreskin, and pull that into where the head of the penis is released, and then correct that which is added to it in the case of inflammation.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked spot on the penis double, and then apply some pus from that to the second ligament, and then hold it like you did with the first ligament in good retention, cut between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the foreskin slightly and stretch the head of the penis; and then let the pain decrease gradually, which is better; and powder it above and on top of the powder spread a cloth in which there is a poultice made from ground coagulated oil mixed with fresh squeezed juice; and leave this one over it for another day; and treat this with treatment until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the knives in castration, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the first knives be uncut and the others cut, so that no part of the key is released, and the length of the two sharp ends should be as long as the length of two thumbs equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in castration is that it easily escapes the whole intrinsic foreskin or part of it, and you must then perform the excision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	And so dig that you stretch that of your time on your thumb in front of the abscess at the location, and cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you can't hold it on your thumb, then cut that with a knife and cut it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days, and you notice that the wound is still swollen after the abscess has been drained, then you should look inside to see if the abscess cavity is soft, and remove any pus there, then apply an application as needed, using a second one that was prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And watch your head on the wound, where it will not be at him upon you.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat that area with the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders, until the wound consolidates.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has overflowed beyond measure from the source, and follows its course, you won't notice it on you.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And if it has been three days, then treat that area as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to stones or congestion, or by pressure or swelling, and resembles those we have discussed regarding methods of treatment in the section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and there is retention of urine due to a stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient lie on his back with knees bent.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then have that person lie down on their back with legs spread and extend their stomach from the point just above their hips, and the patient should tighten their abdomen as much as is possible for them.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	And then the neck of the bladder is strengthened causing expulsion of the stone behind the parts, so that urine is freed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as we have said and the cause acts strongly upon the patient, then it must be made to do so by the person administering treatment with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be fine like a lion's claw, similarly to the needle of a pricking device from the East, having lengthiness akin to that of half a palm, where its tip is also thin.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of expelling urine through that is: hold the bent tip and bind it with wool or thread for good fit; then insert the ends of the tip into the opening you've made in the syringe, and if any hair causes unnecessary obstruction, remove it. Otherwise, forcefully introduce it into the cannula. Then pump the syringe vigorously from both hands and from the abdomen.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient sit over a vessel, and warm the bladder and genitals with oil mixed, olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the base of the penis; and bend the penis upwards towards the navel area; then press on the syringe inside that; then press inside again until it reaches the bladder, and that guides the patient to empty their bladder into the voiding source; otherwise, do not proceed in this order but rather according to where there is twisting.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the catheter gradually with wool bit by bit, because urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and do treatment for urine, use the syringe, don't stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder and patient find relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder irrigation with vinegar and similar instruments that correspond to this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congestion within it, or constriction due to swelling, and you wish to distill water and medicines inside, then this must be done with an instrument called vinegar clamp. This is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If the end of it is closed off, then that's when it is sealed (closed).
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in this there are three tubes: two on one side, as you please.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is a concave shape where water accumulates, and inside you add as much as you need to. When any cause forces this humidity out, it gets forced out; when expelled, it gets forced out again, and when it's expelled far off, according to how the vinegar reacts with which is burned in sea battles using naphtha.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	And if you wish to prevent this humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the vinegar clamp into the moisture, and draw out that which has been accumulated upwards, as the moisture is drawn out into the concavity of the vinegar clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the vinegar clamp in the penis as we have recommended for using the syringe; and then press out the moisture with whatever you press out, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle catheter used for bladder irrigation, which is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, where its tip resembles a small feather, and let the rod inside it be smoothly inserted.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder by movement, and pause in that moisture which you wish to irrigate into the bladder, and place it between two with strong thread on the tip of the double catheter, and heat that moisture over the flame.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the catheter into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand over the bladder with moisture, stretching downwards until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not present with a bladder problem, then take one of the gallstones and make from that circle; and perforate it all over its roundness; and insert a strong needle in those punctures, both when they are turned around; and add the circle likewise as added fat, because when you stop at the point where you want from the moisture, drain and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then place that in the instrument and do it like you did with the bladder, and direct your hand inside so that moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of bile.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of bile and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between bile produced by the gallbladder and bile produced in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the bile during which the operation affects my hand, and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the bile produced in the bladder is precisely that which is made in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I'm recounting that with clear and brief exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it says that bile produced in the larger bladder mostly goes to children; and the signs of this are that urine excreted from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears as sand; and the patient rubs his penis, gets red spots on the skin, and then becomes ill; and in this way one sees the anus with lumps made by those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is only after fourteen years that children recover from this; and the treatment is difficult in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	And for young people, it moves through this midway point among those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in which bile is greater and treatment is easier; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And how do we approach the treatment of that? We start with the beginning of its modification, which heals the patient by crucifying them to allow the entire opening through which is found in their intestines; that opening sometimes prevents the spread of bile due to the examination of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient on their feet and make them stand upright so that the bile can descend to the lower part of the bladder, or escape from any other locations or some spots.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that incision between your hand and the patient's legs, and let the other parts of the patient remain as they are, so that the entire bladder can be made to descend towards the prepared places.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then take care of that and all that excess.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you feel the bile in the space, then you should quickly cover it with a section over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't clean all your touch area, then cover it with oil on the third finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or use the middle finger if they are a full-grown young person, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And take care of the bile while it remains within your touch.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that small amount gradually into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your finger, and expel that to the discharge locations outside the body through the area where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And instruct the priest to press the bladder with his hand; and instruct another priest with his right hand to extend the legs upwards towards the discharge locations above, and with his other hand stretch the cord which remains at the legs in the place where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the curved tool from which this is the shape of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide in him what is between the anus and the legs, not at the middle place, before the left thigh; and let the incision be over that bile, your finger be in the anus, and make a cross incision, so that the incision outside is wide and inside squeezed according to how much bile I have removed from it as possible, but no more, for strongly we hold our finger which is in the anus, the bile must be allowed to drain through this incision, and it is forgotten when the patient recovers.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some bile that has angles and edges, which makes the discharge of it difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that which looks like thorns to a lion, and is round, it causes easier discharge because of this.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if it's that one with angles and edges, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it's not like this, then cover that with oil, or strengthen on that properly, the tip of which is like a file with which you strengthen over bile, and do not escape from it; or insert your delicate fine tool with curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you can't strengthen on that, then expand the crack a bit, and if you see blood flow, cut it with vinegar strengthened.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the bile is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and proceed to insert it; and then push a small amount close to this; and similarly do so if they are spots more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the bile is very large, then it's ignorance to insert that with a large incision, which can happen to the patient in either of two ways: it may stay or cause continuous distillation of urine, so that the location is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. When it comes to administering an evacuation of the body that is outside, or in the fracture of the patient with the scythe inside where he extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon bark, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rendered oil and water, so that the pus may be drawn out by the application.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then roll the patient back onto his chest, and do not move the stomach in during the first day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have moved it, wash the area with water and hot oil, and then treat it with tincture of lime and tincture of balsam until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If pus or corrosive matter occurs in the wound, adjust and apply it, resembling when the bladder is frozen with urine (and this is known by the discharge of urine), then intervene with what you said in the wound and extract that urine. If redness causes the bladder to bleed into the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and against all kinds, where you need to apply what is suitable for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire process of treatment, take care of both thighs and adjust the medicines that are placed on the body.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the wound is small and located on the lower part of the thigh, inside the belly, and urine excretion is forbidden, then treat it with what I recommended before you reach this section; and after these are applied through this treatment, they become apparent. And now I mention this, and that you take a bone saw to use, of which here is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular end, sharp, fixed in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take the bone saw, hold it on the thigh and leave the wound there so that it doesn't return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then place the bone saw in the thigh, making a hole so that the tool can reach that wound.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the tool with your hand in that small wound little by little, and you make an opening so that the other side of it penetrates; for urine is immediately liberated.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is hard in the wound from the part opposite the thigh, when that is frozen and the hole is filled with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not suitable for any reason that prohibits it from being done in this way, then leave the wound open with one bone saw, and another on top of the wound.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And place over the wound in that thigh between two layers.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that (meaning the obstruction or lesion).
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then move the muscle and change the frozen urine in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to have a bone saw on the wound itself, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other muscle above this way, when it is moved close to the exit of the wound, the cause returns to its place and recovers the body.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary when you have the bone saw above, that you lift the cause to the parts above, or that it returns you with your help, and recovers the body like we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	I'm sorry but without context I can't provide a meaningful translation for this term "Capitol .lxi." It seems like it might be referring to a chapter number (.lxi being 56 in Roman numerals), but more information or the surrounding text would be helpful.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Regarding the extraction of stones from the kidneys.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are few.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone is found among those, then the treatment of it becomes difficult, and it is prohibited by complicated methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that in women, if they are too weak during pregnancy, it can cause issues.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you don't find a pregnant woman who can describe if she's menstruating when she's pregnant, or if she has had sexual intercourse with her husband before marriage.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you don't find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation by hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of this section about stones in women is far from the location of the stone itself, which requires a search for the section, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it's necessary for you to do this, then consider taking a skilled woman who knows how to do it, as they are few.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you lack that one, then approach a skilled surgeon who is careful or subtle, or present an elderly woman who is knowledgeable about women's affairs, or a woman who has learned part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So have this woman present, and instruct her to do everything you tell her about the investigation on the stone until its removal; which means that she should consider if the woman is pregnant, then make sure she follows your instructions in her abdomen and can locate the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if she finds that, let her leave her instructions as is, and then instruct her to cut into that area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it's not an appendix, then command the midwife to insert her finger in the patient's abdomen and inquire about the pain. Since she places her left hand on the bladder, she compresses that area well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if she finds that, then direct her to guide that gradually upwards from the opening of the bladder through your parts until it reaches the limit of your thigh, making use of its virtue within which it gets to know the depth of the muscle.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then inscribe on that place at the top of the patient's abdomen, find the depth of the muscle from any part to their stopping point and center the pain in that area. The doctor must not let his finger move away from the pain while he is doing this.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert your finger on that section, and if you feel the pain, adjust to that section according to how much it feels as though the pain has been distributed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the signs of pain are lumps: those among them are few and large, rough and sharp, long and round, having no roots.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And know how many signs there are from you for this way that you might explain about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to see the pus flow, adjust on the inflamed area and leave it for an hour until the pus is gone, then return to your operation when the pain has disappeared.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of pus in men, so you may be helped by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to see the pus flow, and you know that the expulsion of pus is from the incision made during the extraction, then you dust with powder over the area and strengthen it with pulverized and powdered elements and string. Do not repeat this; allow the pain to remain and do not extract too much pus, for otherwise the disease will persist.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And as the heat of the pus subsides over several days, and then it heals, then you return to your operation when the pain has disappeared.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Regarding hernia compression section.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquous is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white bile, which contains the essence of the generative fluids and is referred to as bile.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes these hernias occur in the natural place where their nature provided for the passage of bile, when it has been cut and more bile is there; this is the generative fluid between white bile as we have said, and it is not that which is called 'tart'.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The formation of this type of hernia occurs due to overuse on the generative organs, so this substance is poured into them. Sometimes it happens due to hitting performed on the generative organs.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has different colors: the color of it might be declining to yellow, or to blood-red, or reddish, or it could be black and fatty, or water-like white. This is what varies most among them.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one can tell where this addition of water is located: if it's in the bile we mentioned, then the swelling takes on a shape extending somewhat along its length, like an image of bile, and there appears the generative organ, because moisture contains that from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in its natural place, then the swelling appears at the part of bile and that's why one assumes it to be another organ.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the generative fluid and white bile, then one may find that in the middle.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you can inspect the color of the moisture in the swelling through the cut made into it; according to what emerges from the trace of the incision, judge about what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the healing of this, we have ordered that the patient be given diuretics if that is possible for you and increases his/her body's fluid content.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then he should be placed on his back on some cushion or another for a short while, and place your clean cloths under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left part of him/her and command that the servant follow his/her right side, who extends their arm to one or both sides to the generative organs and the region of the belly button.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a side view and divide the generative organs from their middle location along its length within proximity to the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to rectitude equidistant from the line that should be along the skin of the generative organs, until it reaches white bile including it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scratch that, observe and watch carefully to ensure you don't scratch too deeply; your scratching should be at the place where you are scratching so as to find that it is hanging higher than bile and with great care inspect your scratching according to how much is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the white bile filled with water through an expanded incision and extract all of the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the incision with scissors and extend bile up to your parts; do not touch the generative organs including the region, and cut through the bile in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And you should enter that inside him in pieces or in parts, and especially in his delicate stomach, for if you do not examine meticulously the insertion process, it cannot be guaranteed that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the other person performs this outside of your body during your operation, when you have completed the section of the appendix, return inside him then adjust the two openings of the genital canal with stitches, and treat that wound like the others, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the other person is affected by another illness, then cut off the vessels under the suspensory ligament, and remove the other person, and proceed to treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two parts each time, then you know there are two hernias; therefore, enter that part as you did with the other equally; and if it's clear to your eyes that it's an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the wound, and between the sections use wool submerged in oil or greased with oil; then place another piece of wool which has been submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over both legs and the belly; then place more cloths folded and powders above it, and cover those from above with a cloth as this shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And let there be pressure with two cloths filled with wet wool according to this resemblance; let the ends have a grip that presses against dry wool or wet wool, and place them in the crotch of the underwear, one end going into the other from behind like a loop. The second end should go near the waistband of trousers. Let there be two ends at each thigh, and two others at the elbows, and all pressure should be adjusted within the crotch of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Sometimes this kind of hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery instead of surgical removal; you should use a small surgical knife for the cautery, and cut into the genital canal, then ignite according to what we have recommended when the white appendix containing the water becomes visible. Then you proceed with the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek lettering.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And you should pierce that appendix, and ignite when all the moisture is out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the appendix with scissors, and scrape off the edges with scissors, and use a small heated cautery. Then cut that section as much as is possible while removing everything; and be careful not to let the fire touch the wound.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Know that this operation is safer and further from the wound's discharge than simply treating with medicine, and better than an operation on a section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you experience an adverse reaction in the form of pus at the time of section or cautery, or from wound discharge, then understand how this adverse reaction affects you and apply the corresponding treatment for it as indicated, adapting your healing regimen accordingly.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is scared and doesn't anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what I have advised; and it's when you are certified, based on what we discussed about meanings, that this particular hernia is water-filled.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And understand that you should lift the patient onto some elevated bench, then puncture the abscess at the lowest part of the affected area with a small hole, and proceed with the puncturing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the cut be wide so that it drains all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand on that spot and smooth it out, so that all the remaining water can drain away.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is a conflict in the water discharge at that time you puncture it: this action should not be carried out unless the white pus in the wound's opening causes a conflict and prevents the flow of water, then proceed to introduce an instrument into the wound with which water from the dropsy is extracted, the shape of which precedes; or adjust on the edge of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is purified around three or about those months; and when it increases, then pierce according to that surgical method, so that the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	About the section concerning fatty hernias and the treatment of the patient.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And know that in the section concerning this kind of hernia, there is loss of strength due to anaemia in major organs; so it's my view that you should seek relief and be saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am remembering the operation on that and the specifics of the punctures.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is stated that the punctures occur in the parts where the glands are formed and this happens due to various causes: or by an acute overflow of pus, which spreads to the glands, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it doesn't stop in your pain, and it's a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a lighter one is an evacuated abscess, whose color is dark, and it doesn't move in you.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes some swellings are caused by the constriction of the veins, and due to this swelling you can already remember it, or due to swelling in the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	And you should know that this is due to the spreading of pus when you press on it with your fingers; and don't proceed if you touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And that which is done due to swelling in the veins does not spread from any cause when you press it with your fingers. You should proceed with nothing.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that for this type a section can be done and for the others; you should incise the duct of the glands, bring your hand close to the upper parts, extract the white pus, release the suspensory ligament of the veins, tie them up, and incise the pus ligament that you release from all parts of the area above.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And if the hand is already on those consolidated areas, then proceed to extract the hand and make an incision there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the spleen, or between what is between the layers, then proceed as you release all that adhesion and make an incision through a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it's a new formation of tissue in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then proceed to make an incision through all that belongs to you, and extract the hand as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with oiled cotton and vinegar; and after that take care of it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	About the treatment of hernias that are related to veins.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess wrapped in some kind of covering resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, causing difficulty in exercise and walking on the body.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And for the treatment of this ailment there is concern due to this which leads to remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, proceed as you would say operation in that according to what I did first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that you should have the patient lying on an elevated bed; then proceed to prepare the suspensory ligament of the testicles at the lower parts; and hold up your hand with the duct of the glands in your fingers which are close to the veins; take those other ministers, and extend them vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And proceed to make an incision through the lower abdominal area diagonally across the veins where you will find the veins exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And proceed to scrape off all parts in this manner as we have said in the extraction of veins which are located in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And proceed to insert in those a needle with a double thread, and tie that at the first of the locations where you encounter vit, and tie that another way at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And proceed to make incisions in the middle location on a straight diagonal according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the moist, foul and corrupted fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And proceed to treat the wound with treatment for other wounds in which you wish healing to occur due to those that cause the veins to turn from one of two glands; it is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if vit occurs in all the veins, then proceed as you would have the testicles be extracted or that the testicles are cut through this to remove them from the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the veins, and become stagnant, or that it is done for oneself so as not to grow in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	About the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia happens due to a section that extends in the spleen over the abdomen from parts of the intestines in the belly, so putting back those contents of the rupture into some of them.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture can be due to the chest or to the exhalation of the patient, and these two species occur due to certain causes: from percussion, or through impact, or through loud noise, or due to elevation by any heavy cause, or due to movement.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this condition, when it's due to the expansion of the chest, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and doesn't occur suddenly. It forms an abscess evenly within the pleura because the chest compresses the lung.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it's due to injury of the chest; at its onset, intense pain occurs suddenly. It forms an evident abscess far from the pleura line that appears visibly, and this is due to the displacement of the lung, and the body responds by moving parts away from the chest area.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes, swellings are left outside on the abdominal wall, and this type of hernia is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes swellings are caused by coughing, and sometimes they occur inside the abdominal cavity through a wound; here they get stuck, causing a severe ailment in patients. Sometimes these lead to painful conditions that worsen significantly when pressure is applied.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of these species of this ailment, there's fear involved, so it's necessary to ensure that hunting doesn't occur in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method for the operation of this is that you command the patient to return the hernia to its cavity with his hand towards the inner parts of his abdominal cavity if it returns upon his own effort, and then place yourself over his back between his chest and your hands, lifting up their limbs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then cut the seam which joins the abdominal cavity to the upper parts, and incise the testicles' seam all along; then make two cuts in the section according to your need for opening that section there.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section, according to how much you can possibly make from it, should leave a hole in that area.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then scrape that chest off the parts which are left of the testicles' seam, while the white hard chest is exposed from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you insert your finger into that which severs the testicle, into that which is between the white chest, which is left from the hole, and between the chest according to its position, and rinse with that adhesion that is in the part behind the hole.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then pull the testicles seam away from the inner parts, and do this while stretching the white chest on your left hand, lifting up the hole to the part of the section; command the assistant to stretch the hole upwards and you dissolve that adhesion behind with a full solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And with your fingers, ensure there's no cause for the lump to be enclosed in the hard white chest.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause in him, then remove that from his stomach.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with thick thread of about four threads, insert it through the chest, which is below the seam of the testicles; then incise those ends that emerge from the thread inside where there are four threads, and then weave some of them together in a manner resembling a cross; tie with that part of the chest which we said leaves the seam of the testicles with strong tension on two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap those ends of the threads and tie them firmly where none of the blood vessels that nourish those can pass any cause for an abscess to form here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And make another firm opening three fingers away from your first line, far from the middle of his abdomen. Then smooth that part of the chest which leaves the seam of the testicles in proportion to the size of that mentioned, and cut around it completely according to roundness, leaving out the hole.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then cut into the part left of the seam of the testicles through the section which carries strength and health as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply wool soaked in oil, and rest on the wound; then administer the thread we recommended (and as some swellings of the white chest are treated with cautery, which was mentioned near the incision for bleeding points, certain swellings cause those) then smooth the thread so that it can fall by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If hunting in him is delayed, then let it be immersed in hot water and rest on that part where it can fall as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with the other healing method for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capitol .lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	De hernia ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has seen that it was burned during its treatment.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the early ones would say that it is done like we have recommended for the hernia which is through veins; namely, you guide the vessels close to the section near that one, and then dry out in the middle area around there an abscess at this place where I open that part, within which the vessels would fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter sixty-seven.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the disorder that occurs in the kidneys.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there are injuries that lead to rupture in the kidneys as we have said, and you should find the spot.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any causes of hernias to the body; if they do occur, there are few; and return them to their place at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If this lasts for an extended time at this point, it causes a fissure in the chest cavity so that hernia falls into the chest; this happens due to the extension of the chest as we have said, the cause being that the chest is stretched, and nearby the area becomes inflamed and you will find it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of this is with a cautery as described in the story about it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes wounds are treated with iron according to this method: and the patient lies on their back between your hands, and you dry the area of the rupture around the pus pockets by heating it in a section according to the size of three inches.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white chest that is below the diaphragm until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take hold of the rib and place your hand over the prominent part of the chest, and press that to the navel region of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then place both prominent areas at the end of the rib cage, and adjust one of those to the other in relation to the suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the rib, do not cut into the chest all over, nor extend too far or any other cause such as I should know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that in the treatment of wounds, and as you incise through the skin, cleanse that and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; when the chest tightens and does not allow for the reassembly of the rupture's prominence.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this location, where it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter sixty-eight.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	About the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Possible causes for the cord of the testicles in some men it is softened due to this and because the muscles that are within that area become softened, and there is a care for them.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the person assisting in its treatment to lie the patient according to their position, and expose the entire cord which becomes softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, pinch at the beginning the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut through the sutures; and then treat in terms of wound healing until it is healed, and let the stitches fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter sixty-nine.
De castracio.	About castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but due to necessity I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it for only one reason, which is when the doctor is asked about it, he must know how to treat him since it happens; the other way is that we have sometimes needed castration of other animals for our young ones, just like with cattle, horses, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that castration is done in two ways: either through castration or by making an incision and opening.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	And in the case when it is done through castration, the way of the operation is that we kill the animal while it is still young so that his testicles become softened and swell.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those in your hand until they are dissolved and do not show any marks on the skin.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in castration done through incision and opening, suppose you have the animal and press on the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut through each rib on one side where two ribs meet.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those abscesses that you have opened.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not let any cause occur on those of the chest, but rather the subtle chest which is above the ribs.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done through castration, as castration tends to leave no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter seventy.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	About the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is where orifice for urine and feces is located within the space of the testicles' cord, that is between two testicles with a male half having female skin hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some cases involve urine flow from the location of the testicles' cord.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	As for females, it is a special case: that the female counterpart on the abdomen resembles two male testicles each with their own small amount of tissue towards the front like male's prepuce and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure consists of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should incise those tight tissues so that the discharge of that (disease) can escape, and then proceed with the treatment for other afflictions.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men where they urinate, which is in the channel of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Regarding inflammation and swelling due to causes specific to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong, localized inflammation is adjusted due to natural causes within which it is stretched and undergoes such observation; in some cases, swellings are magnified in certain women to the extent that they spread similarly to men and permeate during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should grasp the excess of inflammation with your hand or a tool and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not conclude with an incision, especially at the beginning of the root (of the condition), in order that no discharge of pus occurs.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with treatment for other afflictions until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Fetus flesh is the flesh that does not develop in the womb of the mother within which it fills, and forcefully is pushed out to different parts according to its shape (and for this reason they first called it “tail ailment”); therefore, you should incise it like you would with inflammation, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hemorrhoids are when the anus in women is not perforated, or there is a small tear.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be due to nature or by accident.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by tail ailment which preceded it, and that happens due to uneven flesh or due to a fine hair or an excess.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it can occur at the beginning of pregnancy, in her ribs, due to excess liquid or under liquid, prohibiting coitus and childbirth, and forcefully prohibiting menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made through observation of the midwife, if the protrusion is obvious, it is straightforward; more so if it's not obvious, then you touch it with your fingers or with a tool.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the protrusion is due to a fine hair, and it's close to both labia, then you squeeze and burst that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place your hands on the two labia, and then place your finger tips under both breasts.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs spread apart, and you then spread the two labia forcefuly until that fine hair is broken and the protrusion is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And you take wool and dip it in oil and place that over the area, and continue doing this for a day so that the incised area doesn't harden.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the hair is thick and dense, then you should incise that with a needle or with mint leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the protrusion is due to pus, then suspend that with a tool, and incise that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop pus discharge and bleeding bites, such as aloe vera, and dragon's blood, and essences, adjust it with hen's egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And you should administer a large lead tube in order that the ailment doesn't consolidate quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that there for several days and administer saffron tea.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And after it is treated with the other consolidation treatment until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes events occur during pregnancy that affect other tissues, and you should then proceed by incising according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If that happens due to pus-filled boils, in the boil which is inside the mother, do not oppose it with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail ailment, and red boils that occur in the anus of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the result of damage to those vessels' mouths where blood flows continuously from them; and for old hemorrhoids, these remedies are used.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already mentioned the kinds of those and their signs, as well as distinguishing those that receive treatment from those that do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it is stated that hemorrhoids and boils when they occur during pregnancy and do not show symptoms, in those cases treatment with iron should not be applied.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	These are the ones that occur on the mother's opening where a sensation is felt, these are the ones that receive treatment.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you should have the woman in mustard oil and then spread flax or a rough cloth over her buttocks, or under the sheets, and incise those on her thighs.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And after that, apply the discharge of the blood from one of the internal powders in a bleeding manner, such as aloe vera and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then wash her feet for an hour, and then place her in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding continues, then make her take a decoction of sumac and sorrel tea, and garlic and similar.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And take flour of ordinary and mix it with honey and warm water, then make a poultice with this over the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the wound has been cauterized, it is good; otherwise, make two suction cups and over the nipples do incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and soak it in colostrum or in the juice of elderberry or in cooked wine, then apply it to the area; and treat the area with ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May this alcohol soak, which has a harsh examination, be that you immerse it in this way so that your appearance is like what I said in the equivalent alcohol preparation.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat that until it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitol seventy-four.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Regarding the perforation of an accidental hernia in the abdomen.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special symptoms of abscesses that occur in the abdomen, such as indigestion, abscesses on stones, ulcers, adhesion, erysipelas, hemorrhagic fever, typhus, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the specifics of those, as well as their signs, and the treatments for them in this section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And know that I will explain in this treatise about how to use a cautery for the abscesses found in the abdomen when they are related to the healing of abscesses, and if you want to know how the operation is performed on it, here it is.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and pus, fever, and sometimes a redness appears, and if it feels over that area, then note that there is perforation of it. Treat it with what aids in maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	So make the incision along a line that has two lines; have them recline on their back and adjust their feet to the lower part of the belly, and expand their thighs, place their hands under their buttocks, and tie them comfortably with what is suitable.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife follows on their left side and administers the tool at which an opening in the abdomen is opened, its form will come from those causes that will follow.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this tool, fix it on the line of the abdomen's opening in the woman, so that what enters the abdomen from the tool is not more than the opening of the abdomen and guides the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the opening of the abdomen, then cover the texture of the opening with powder to prevent the total insertion of any instrument into the opening of the abdomen.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And cover that you place the substance that flows from the tool on the left side and above it, and have the one administering to keep the tool and rotate the substance until the opening of the abdomen is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when you see the pus, and it is touched by hand and is moist, then cover that you dry this from his head with a cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the healing is evacuated, then cover that you place in the wound a poultice immersed in rendered oil or turpentine oil with some heat; and place the leg on the drying in the opening of the abdomen.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the abdomen, and over the place where it was injured, wool that has been soaked in water with basil bulbs.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And once it is healed around two days with ointment which suits into until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some soaks the abdomen and the wound are washed in that they are treated with water and honey, and afterwards with water that has been boiled with parsley or rosemary leaves, and then returns to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the abdomen inflamed, then cover that you are forbidden from treating it with a tool, instead treat it with what we have said in this section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the infants should be treated with medicine when they come out according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and that when you have the woman panting at the openings below, she wants to smell the air, and on this it is heated because what is above her is laborious, and hastens the birth of the fetus, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the movement of it towards its head, and the second one either hanging or suspended from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you notice those signs, then know that the belly of the one is compressed by itself so that the fetus descends slightly just as it descends upon its head, make the second one come to her, and get rid of those excesses for good maturation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That is another one of this part being unnatural and inexplicable, when the fetus is sitting on its feet and the body of the one is also sitting in front of their head, and their feet under them, or at their foot,. etc. or the head of the one is sitting and their hand is either under their belly or at their abdomen, making it upright over its neck, resembling figures that are inexplicable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is for the midwife to be knowledgeable and discerning in all those matters, and to avoid error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the form of those [conditions], and which organ is in those for it to be significant by this and to stand on this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the illness is situated on its head by natural escape, and it is powerful in women and happens to them at their difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of this has weakened, then make that sear, which women have with it, and evaporate its internal heat along with fennel and oil humectants.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then introduce the needle between their armpits close to the small bone and make a little cut near it, or dry that inside her nail where this humidity resides.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman so that the pain descends the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not descend, then apply that the woman should be heated with garlic and fennel baths.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, and near the nostril, have her squeeze it and make her sneeze with the condiments; and keep her mouth and her nose open for an hour, so that once the fetus passes through easily.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the fetus are passed through at the beginning, then apply that you reduce those gradually to ease the passage little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If it does not comply with the treatment, then make the woman lie on her back and lift her feet off the ground, and place the chair over the earth; and the woman should be kept from falling due to this shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts do not come out and the fetus is stuck, then introduce those and pull out the membrane of the fetus or fasten it to her back with a cloth and pull that out evenly, so that once it passes through easily.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	During the movement of the embryo over their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus moves over their feet, then apply that you push those towards it, and then turn the fetus little by little, and make that equal this, and take one of its feet and stretch those gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When it is situated in the thighs, then command her to squeeze and make her sneeze with condiments, so that once it passes through easily if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it does not pass through as we have advised, then return the fetus little by little so that you place it according to its natural figure, so that this will pass through easily with a slight movement.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all this is forbidden by us, then take sulfur and dissolved gum, and crush them thoroughly in the mortar for good crushing, and apply that woman's heat, the bottom part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make her urinate in warm water so she can reach the flanks.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And each time that the parts of you are softened, then have her sub-fumigate with myrtle and place this under you.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation lasts an hour, then have her lie on a chair, and make her sneeze and open her mouth, lift her from this, and press the lowest part of her belly gently, so that the fetus will pass through easily.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Movement of the fetus over their buttocks and its parts.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus moves like this, then introduce her parts little by little; and have the woman stand with her hands on her hips, and her feet in front, and place those under her knees, and let her hands reach her back.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently on her belly little by little, and make sure that the parts are prepared where the feet are left between in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus does not pass out easily, then take her feet and move them vigorously, and then press what is on the flanks little by little so that the fetus can reach the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then introduce her parts and make the fetus equal little by little, and command the woman to squeeze so that the fetus passes easily.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Lateral movement of the fetus hanging on one of its sides.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Introduce the hand in reduction, but if you cannot reduce this, then lift the woman and make her go along.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if walking is not possible, then have her lay on the bed, and shake her thighs with strong shaking, and apply remedies from mucus that I advised earlier.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth has come, then have her sneeze on a chair, and then study about hand reduction, and make the fetus equal according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to squeeze herself so that it passes easily.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Movement of the fetus over the hips, spreading its parts, and the surface of her is twice as large as her mother's.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Have the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and then gently roll it little by little, so that this is facilitated.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when they are equal and once it's done, then rest on the heat that we have advised with oil and mucus.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to squeeze little by little, and when you have done this, then make her urinate on a chair and command her to be inclined towards the right side of her bed, and then command her to squeeze herself; and make her sneeze with remedies.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The birth of the fetus has been prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the patient feels the horrors of the stomach according to this method, consider it, and then you should insert the second one into your thumb where moisture is drained out.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging on the face and neck of the patient, then you should insert that of the belly button, so that it does not retain the mucus.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then you force the fetus towards the parts inside until you place that second one covering it, and ask the woman to hold herself for several times, and he will be expelled more quickly if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins have irregular births, and sometimes they are born after three or four months, but this is strange and it is difficult to explain; yet these are causes of nature, not disease.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And account for those, whether they are multiples, one second, and are separated by the placenta, distinguishing them within the umbilical cord of each of those. Some births happen naturally as if it's a fetus being expelled, and there are some births that occur in an impossible way as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult for you, you must bring the birth process to what we said about natural and unnatural figures, then you treat those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the woman is subtle and makes what she does with ease and subtlety, and in delay, and her ingenuity according to every figure as it has been prepared for by the womb leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering that which is formed from embryos in the womb, and what aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	The text states: "Some scabs are formed in the main one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, then you should verify that a female abortion contains five viable ones, and another one containing all forms, which is caused by measurement of the glorious sages."
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this is covered as it relates to the science of midwifery which relies on her keen sense for that faint resemblance to what she feels, and therefore holds onto that according to how she senses things.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter CCLXXVI
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus according to what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled naturally, then you must consider using surgery with your hands. Then you should consider if the woman is of sound health and not affected by any of the circumstances that could cause her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then consider if the woman is lying on her back over a table, and if her head is inclined upwards and her thighs are elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should have that of both parts or be bound over the table so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and high-quality honey, as well as fennel and seeds of all kinds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and medicines, and then place her hand in comfort under the mother, and then set up her position so that she can hold onto the fetus' hands.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Place yourself conveniently in this manner: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered by turning onto its head, and then hold onto the hands of the fetus, or at the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or let it hang from the beard, or at the sternum, or on the appropriate areas of the back, or let it rest on the lower ribs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the descent is onto its feet, then at the heel, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Then consider having the hand on the right side, placing the curvature of it in that location which is between the last two fingers of the left hand, and place your hand comfortably so as to hold onto one of those locations that we have mentioned, so as for it to proceed towards the lower part.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then hold and position in the location of it another hand, or the elbow if necessary, so that there is an equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And be careful in every part, so that the expulsion of it is relieved as it is done with teeth when removing them.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And consider in it where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then consider that the midwife should moisten some of her fingers with oil and insert them skillfully and rotate around those that are being retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the hands should be placed at the location which is more suitable; and do this while making sure that the entire fetus is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is inside in front of the other one, and it's not possible to reduce that by pushing it out due to pressure on its belly, then consider wrapping a cloth around that; and then extract that while making sure that everything is expelled, and insert that either at the junction of the hands or under the arm.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this similarly for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the patient's head is large, or if there occurs constriction in the abdomen, or if it happens to have water pressure adjustment in their head, then one should intervene among these small sharp points and open the head, extracting the water, or that which can be discovered using an instrument called "alundat", whose shape will come close to the shapes of other instruments near the head.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly in case the patient has naturally large head: then insert an incision like a bandage, or take that with an instrument called 'alundat' as we have said; and then extract the bones using forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and constricted at the sternum, then it should be cut deep into where the moisture which is in the feet is immersed.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it's not complicated, and doesn't affect the abdomen, then you should make an incision on the head as soon as it is feasible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the intestines of the belly are affected by inflammation or in their lymphatic area, then you should make an incision there where the moisture runs that is within them.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the patient's condition is on their feet, then its distress is slight and the direction to the mouth of the mother is also slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it's constricted in the belly and feet, then you should make an incision where you extract that which you've wrapped around your hand, and you cut open the belly and feet where this flows within those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are fine and you return the head, then the surgeon inserts his right hand; if the mother's mouth is open, then he inserts his hand into her navel area, and encircles that head, pulling it towards the sharp points inside the mother's mouth, and proceeds to insert one or two fingers, pulling them inward.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted due to inflammation in which a cautery burns out, then make sure not to overheat it; before that, proceed to administer an infusion of fatty cold moisture.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages; and continue treating the patient with waters that soothe and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the patient is on its side, then if possible make it as upright; and administer what we have said for live patients.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that's not possible, then make an incision on the sides, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure you don't leave any cause inside for a second operation.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said for the treatment of inflammations caused by cauterizations that occurred in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a discharge of pus, then treat with收敛ic waters and proceed with the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have indeed seen a pregnant woman with a dead fetus in her belly, and there was another opening used for that purpose, and the fetus was dead itself.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to someone for a long time with an inflammation in their umbilical region; and it was swollen inside the abdominal cavity, and started bleeding out.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the inflammation did not consolidate.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I used some strong-acting bandages on them, and made an incision in their bone, and after several days, made another incision; and I was too amazed, because there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I treated the inflammation, extracted the dead fetal bones from them, the woman was in her usual position, and I had been treating it this way for a long time, corrected herself a little bit.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not hesitate to say it is strange, but rather because in this there is knowledge and help for what the doctor uses his hands to administer treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Regarding the forms of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of the cauterizing instrument which is used to open the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a strengthener in which the free ones are equalized, to which equalization two cauterizers are attached at both ends of two sticks.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this cauterizer should be made finer in terms of strength, and it can be made either of iron or oak wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each stick is two thumbs and the edge of both sides is one thumb; and the length of each is a hand plus half; and in the middle of two sticks there are two adjustments for this iron rod that are already set, from which the length is about a hand plus a little bit less, and the width of each is two thumbs or just a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And those two adjustments should be placed in the mother's mouth so that they open with them when you rotate the two prescribed cauterizers.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape similar to that, but finer and more lightweight:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of iron or oak wood according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it are two attachments like this, and the length of those attachments is about a hand, and the width of each is two thumbs.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the larger one, then you make the incision on the belly over the soft part of the feet hanging down, opening it up where is between the thighs of them.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And when you open your hand towards the tool, as you would with scissors evenly according to the quantity you want from the size of the mouth of the larger one inside where the meter will make it exactly how you wish.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which they used to say:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Shape of the propellant, where it is propelled by the force:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of union, in which the large head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, like this, and sometimes certain procedures are performed long like forceps according to this form, like this, which has teeth like those of a rudder on which it is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of union for few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of a vessel having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of a vessel having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps in which the teeth are closed on it where the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a spatula having two ends, on which the head is cut:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two spatulas lying:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are practiced, and when there are more species of that one and they are prepared by the artisans, it is easier to their operation and better for the men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments already when you should be equipped with them, for the need of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For removal of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained you should perform childbirth, then command the mother to retain her breath, and prepare to sneeze on condition, and place your hand on their mouth and their nose, and if it comes out by this means well done.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a spoon and pierce through the cover with a needle and pause on that herb under the mother's mouth, like with camomile and rough herbs and anise and chamomile and powdered saffron and cinnamon sticks and saunf.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the spoon, and place that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And prepare to put in a reed pipette in the mother's mouth and have that inside where the vapor will come into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And prepare to sneeze her like we have said, and the second one is quickly expelled.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Perhaps if this treatment goes well without any difficulty, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in camphor oil or in a lavender tincture, and introduce that into the womb and have her expel the second one with it, and when you find that, then take it and extend it little by little. If it sticks in the mother's pelvis, then place your hand according to what we have advised, and as soon as she finds the second one, extract that little by little according to rectitude so that the mother does not fall under the strong urge.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before you move to the right and left sides of her belly for ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust it in terms of strength so that she obeys and avoids adhering.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is cramped, we have already advised this treatment with sneezing and with medication of the spoonful herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If it is not expelled through all the causes that we have advised, then keep in mind that you do not tire on that by repetition of the abstract, but rather observe that what comes out from her to the mother's mouth lies on the surface of the feet, and prepare that with grease and fourfold medicine; for that will dissolve that over a few days and it will be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is applied, there is an elevated bad odor to the head and stomach, and that causes discomfort in the mother; and then observe that these are administered as sub-smokes and appropriate for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	As such, the Ancients already use sub-smoke of snail dirt and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of an instrument by which the woman is sub-smoked for retaining menstruation and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made from wood or reed.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle end is placed in the womb and the wider end over the fire, and the sub-smoke is placed on the branches of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And have that inside so that that sub-smoke is consumed and repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an unperforated child's anus:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The baby is small and its butts are not pierced, which have thickened and become inflamed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then command the midwife to puncture it with her finger; if not, pierce that with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And prepare over it wool saturated in vinegar and oil; and then treat that with grease while it is healing.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it has thickened, then place a reed pipette for several days over it, and stop when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is an issue with rectal prolapse due to consolidation of inflammation or abscess; then confirm that this consolidation has been penetrated and proceed with the healing according to what we have discussed about treatment and lead (metals).
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the treatment of the fistulas that occur, it is left.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur down the passage, leaving low pus pockets which are a disease and roughness. They tend to form close to the anus outside or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or spots.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that lump has hardened and is filled with white or moist pus, and there are some rashes associated with these fistulas, some of which penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those that penetrate are known by how they come out from those through excretion and through wind effect; some of them cause the patient discomfort during excretion, and forcefully it comes out from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas cause rashes in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of them causing rashes into the joint of the thigh and into the opening of the anus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the case of a recognized penetrating fistula that enters the anus and does not penetrate, you place your finger where I instructed inside the anus, and gently insert a thread or iron into the fistula when there is no obstacle.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is an obstacle in that case, then insert a subtle lead thread or horse hair into it where you feel the thread or the hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that throughout nor proceed with any cause of excretion or worm or wind, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now lie on your side for treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its meaning is urinary discharge from that and prohibition to do anything further until that location has been treated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone causing pain in the bloodstream, this is a sign that the thread goes inside here if there is no obstacle within the bone, and pain from the bloodstream at the site; and that it produces persistent pus; and that it does not benefit with this treatment, nor has it been consolidated with grease.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, not the whole treatment is cured, and the treatment of those requires work and dedication by surgeons over which they are based.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in that one that is non-penetrating and not hardened, healing with iron was expected according to what I will tell you, and this which I have already done.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And this is that the patient lies with your hands under their buttocks and elevates their legs inside them, their thighs are inclined towards their belly, and you insert a lead or horse hair thread into it if there is an obstacle in the fistula, until you know where the thread goes through.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if it is that the patient is lying around the groin area, then confirm where you placed your finger inside the groin.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your finger that the thread has already been discovered penetrating by itself, or between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you will certainly know that this is penetrating; and then do not work on it, since there is no healing in this, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some would say that it is cured in certain people who tolerate it.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment that is expected to young in them, you ignite a subtle cautery according to the extent of the fistula, as it was mentioned before, and insert that burning into the fistula close to the groin; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you know that all those tissues adjusted to a feather plume are already adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with bandages enveloped in oil until all those tissues that are adjusted heal, and also treat that with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating it, and if it is healed, well that's good; and otherwise, then this is not cured within a time for another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the thread goes in, and does not penetrate into the finger which is in the anus, and between that and the thread that is densely covered with flesh or hair, and sometimes the fistula when it extends to the surface of the scrotum, then dry the scrotum from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if drying occurs on the thread, and there within the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the end of the thread extends, and freedom is released with ease.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then flatten those tissues that are connected like a feather quill of a chicken, and do not damage them with any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if there is a discharge of pus several times when you are working with those tissues, then let it be like that and with any minor instrument cauterize either with fire or with acute medicine; the cauterization with fire adjusts good habits: this is adjustment to those adjusted tissues, and elimination of pus by drying out moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped in oil or in hot ashes until the place gets hard, and then later cure the infection with greasy flesh generating and consolidating.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And among the medicines which have restriction and excess; when then is restored it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula already enters into the rectum and is lengthened from your body's surface, then you should intervene in the anus and inquire about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you try and when between you and it is quickly of muscle or of flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then the operation on it is not for them but rather according to the path of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is to administer one of three ways with it: either cauterize that as we have said; or stop that within you reach the cavity of which so that it becomes possible for you to intervene in those and the healing follows; do not operate on this through restriction because you do not penetrate into the containing canal, and you act on the body according to your will at its exit point; then care accordingly with what we have said where strength lies in health; or extend that membrane and clean out that pus if you stop that within near the anus as we have said, or on temptation or another sharp tool, then modify those flesh-filled fistulas which are in the restriction area through excision; then strive to restore all the wound through restriction, and if the pus openings above do not solidify, and splits the opened fistula at the part of the anus, there is less pus coming out.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some fistulas are closed according to this manner: when you insert the needle into the fistula, and around the anus surface on the body at the base and near the opening of the anus, then take the temptation of perforated extremity, as thus like a needle preparing the veins according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert in that place wrapped by many needles or around those; then insert temptation on the needle within the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it penetrates into the rim of the anus near inside, then you extract that needle as you insert what we said into the anus; and extract the extremity of the needle and adjust both ends simultaneously, strengthen each one, and leave this for a day or two, and when most it penetrates the flesh into the anus, strengthen also in the place where those tissues are penetrated between the two ends of the needle which fit.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound so that it becomes solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrable, then make it penetrate in whatever way you have prepared, but rather in the rectum, which should not be done by you so that you do not damage the canal; then proceed with it so that it becomes healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of a spiked tool for what is cut in the fistula: the curvature of which becomes more acute and the other part is not as sharp, so that you do not damage unnecessarily what is not needed, just like that.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing up hemorrhoids in which the wound runs through their closure.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are in two ways, whether they resemble the anus like it's of coal, or those become like fat from grapes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those they are small and large, and the wound runs through them all at once, and it's one thing, and it's dirt, and it's inside the anus, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are inside the anus follow the same patterns of less humidity, in which water turns yellow or a little blood appears on continuous body skin, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the healing of that which is inside the rectum is that you command the body to relax and express in such a way that the rectum burns and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should massage and suspend with ropes or what you have on your thumb, then proceed to cut those according to their sizes.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the ropes are not kept in them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with rough cloth or with leather or woolen felt, extract those with your words, then proceed to cut those and sprinkle some ashes powder near the wound for they will replace that with cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those using another type of healing until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not allow exit, then immerse the body in a bath with a small mastication bite and wash it with what is in the rectum that allows less expulsion when the body is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	And if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is minor, and you should take those with your thumb or take them with ropes, cut those, then treat those using what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever feels the cut, know that you should administer sewing of them according to this manner: take wrapped needle and insert it into the needle, then extract the hemorrhoids from their parts above, and make the needle penetrate in the part opposite on the other side, wrap both ends of the needle's protrusions around the part leaving room for the needle, laterally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with solid structure, and then pinch the needle and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leave one out, in order that the excess of the disease may flow away from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place over the buttocks with a cloth dipped in rosin oil or gauze; place that over the bottom and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that in the box; and when it heals, treat those with ointment or some other cure inside until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	About the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas occur due to excessive opening or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since these are old and do not benefit in that medicine, you should treat them at the tip of the spatula or with your fingernail until they become moist and then drain the pus from those, preventing their consolidation; then cure them until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And you should treat them with plenty of pus, the first thing being to drain and expose them; then cure them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of ulcers is what matters most.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that treating ulcers is the key, and not otherwise, it's just like the color of the blood resembling a piece of cutlet, occurring everywhere in the body but more so on the feet and hands, and for those with pain you must allow them to breathe.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then treat what has penetrated that which is in the circuit of the cutlet, and keep it with forceps or tweezers, and remove its root; then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize what follows after in its head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	True warts are small, hard, pus-filled round lumps on the surface of the body, and ulcers occur in the throats of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And to treat them, you should spread and insert that, or place that with a needle or under the skin until it heals.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And once removed, whether internally or externally using the tool I will direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Ants are small, soft or pus-filled lumps on the surface of the body that grow around the head, and when you find them they look like the bite of an ant, occurring around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for them is to take a needle or a thread of duck quill or spider web, which must be strong, and place that on the ant until it contains the circle around the body's parts; then move your hand with the needle into the area until you reach what is in the circuit of the ant, and hold that at the base of the flesh, making sure to remove the ant from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with an awl or iron needle according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the tip of the needle above the cannula be slightly sharp, silent (meaning not too thick), wrapped around it such that from the hand's perspective the appearance seems shaved and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the ant as previously mentioned in the cauterization of a wart on the head of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The form of the instruments that are administered for giving a cure.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some ulcers are given a cure using silver or tin or melted iron or hammered metal; some ulcers are treated with small and large instruments according to those used by you, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children's sores should be small. And from those whose butts are hot or painful, the cures of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and few cure:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the cannula above where the bag is bound should be wide according to this manner; and as far as from where the bag is bound, it should do so as many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the tip of the pus below it, which enters the anus, should be silent (meaning not perforated), with a slight length; and on one side of the bag there are two prongs, and on the other side one prong, and the width of the prong according to the thickness of the rays and large pus is small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which medicines of bladder beast or sheep skin are placed be as wide as a hand's span.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced with prongs like this when they are rotated; and the size of that which is between the prongs should be as large as a mentioned thing.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And place through those prongs a strong iron needle of raw blood or around that; adjust the bag to that; when placing the bag in there, straighten it at the head of the cure between two distinguishing points with strong constriction, and cure each one of the prongs: The quality of curing this way is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; make sure not to give too much or too little.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And have the patient lie on their back, lift their thighs and place one's hand under them as if they were humans or a mattress; then smear the edge of the cautery with oil or albumin from egg whites or from fenugreek or almond milk; and smear that in the anus with ease, and command the attendant to take hold of the bag and press it strongly several times until what is inside the cure is completely drained out of the intestine; and remove the cure and the patient lifts their thighs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if medicine requires one to rest, have as much as possible; and if he sleeps through the whole night, it benefits better in old age.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Better if you sear him in the abdominal issues of belly and the pain, then you will apply the cautery inside until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then his searing must be subtle and delicate, of the sears under which children's fingers can be inserted.
De curacio de las plaguas.	For the cure of the sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already spoken about the division of the cure for sores that is suitable for free people, and I also prescribe this cure according to my understanding and medical knowledge.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So it is said that the sores are diverse according to how they occur and according to the place where the sores appear.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which wounds occur that result in sores are as follows: through scorching by fire, or incision of space or of flesh, or impact with a spear, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those caused by wounds.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Better the sores that occur in the body parts are as follows: a wound that appears on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or mouth, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the cure for some sores by adopting that reasoning and rule for other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will start with the simple head sores, and the recall of compound ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So it is said that when a simple head sore occurs and there is no fracture, then consider: whether it's due to fire or something similar, and if you have burned the cord just like that and it becomes large, fear of a possible abscess in that patient. Then sear and perform the cephalic leeching at once, and don't delay this; extract from the wound according to the amount of virtue in him if no cause prohibits leeching, especially if the discharge from the sore is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And for the leeching of the opposite side of the affected area; and watch over the patient to avoid overfilling, dehydration, and fatty foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Better if you rule out any cause of the diminution, then reduce in food and do not approach to meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the sore, if it happens that an abscess appears, apply hot oil in its rupture or in water where it is styptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Better if you are sure of an abscess appearing, then place over the sore, if it is recent in his wound and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply lightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, then place on other ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Better if the sore is large or due to incision and impact, and his lips are not adjusted by pins, then adjust those according to my recommendation for suturing them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Better if the sore has already revealed from the bone and penis, and it is not retention but a small suspensorium, then incise that and treat the wound with medicines and restore meat in place of the cord, and command the patient to eat meats where there is hardness: caps and forms like them, until they are healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find corruption in the cord and does not stick to the bone, then you need to incise all that part and remove it, and treat that area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Better if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur, and it is not excised by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that unincised, then you need to incise it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize until blood flow stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then their cause is minor; therefore, you apply this powder over them until the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of this powder is as follows: take oil from one part of beeswax, dragon's bark in two parts, and three parts of unextinguished ashes; mix them thoroughly and sift them, then apply it completely over the wound and secure it well internally so that it adheres to it when applied and coagulates with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply this powder over it and let it stay until such time that it is not heated by you, while the medicine does not fully heal in him.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some wounds do this alone with a cautery, when it's not available to you beeswax and dragon bark.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is done in large wounds when it's suitable to apply that over them and strengthen them, and those wounds which are recent with their wound, which have not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it's during summer time, then this application of this powder is not appropriate in its usual position, rather you should treat those with what we have said previously. Therefore, place over those some more digestible ointments or sprinkle over those powders from the flour of bread mixed with water and honey until they form a paste; and proceed to treat those with another method until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a small fracture happens on bone, then you extract this bone by operation.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment for skull fractures in which poisoning occurs.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds on the collarbone.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If a wound occurs in the collarbone, then there is no difference in treatment, and compared to skull wounds which are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If already the nerves in the collarbone or artery are cut, then if it's nerve damage, not within their body but to avoid treatment that causes intense constriction, like vinegar and saying it's corrosive resembling their gall bladder in relation to nerves and causing obstruction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And don't let any cause of total freezing persist, for the substance of nerves freezes and its continuation is in the brain, which is the center of all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it's treated with lighter medicines, like when rinsed with warm water, some herbs infused in olive oil, either raw or cooked, and thyme when rinsed with hot water, and then other baths according to this method, and then the salve is applied.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then perform suturing, or ligate the blood vessels of the patient, and afterward treat that with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound has depth or occurs in the lower part below the pubis, then puncture that at the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the wound an artery has already been cut and a bleed is obtained, then separate or dry that, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires this.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If it has cut the sponda of the jugular or all of them, and so have saved the veins in the collarbone, then adjust the ligaments of the larynx with suturing over the carotid artery, don't touch that; equalize that and reduce that to its natural shape, and strengthen that with a decent tension, and leave that for a few days; and treat that with ointments where there is constriction and stimulation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already entered in bone, then puncture it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can from them; that which does not belong to you, leave it until the wound heals internally, and so that its separation from you is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then apply over it the powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the wound there is an opened channel, then treat that with what will recall its memory to its head region.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds on the collarbone or injury that occurs between the shoulders and is made in the armpit, under the shoulder blade, or on the ribcage.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance thrust or rib injury, and you assess the depth of the wound when the patient inhales; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is not depth to the wound and it is recent in relation to his breath, then rest on him of the first hour powder, and don't tighten that so as not to allow the breath to be retained at the depth of him and return to his heart and revive the patient, but rest on him an attractive ointment, and let him have two baths a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then rest on the opening of the wound with a cloth so that it sucks what there is of moisture; and make the patient sleep over the wound so that what is contained flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If already three days or more have passed since the wound and no seizure or heart tremor occurs in the patient, then if you recognize good provisions for him, then know that the wound is saved; and afterward treat it with rest and any other good treatment until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the recovery of the patient is excused, and it has been open for all the time, then know that a channel has already formed; therefore treat that through its head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a cut in the armpit or rib, and it is simple on the surface of the leg or thigh, then treat that with what precedes suture, if large, or with powder, if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already entered into bone, and if you have cut bones, then twist the wound and try to extract those bones, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound heals internally, that their extraction is relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of other wounds occurring in other limbs during treatment follows the same procedure as we have described.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds on the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The illness which occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the large ones, some remedies cause the intestines or nerve of the intestine to be affected, so that their invasion and suture should be more intense and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And for the small disruptions are made difficult by another method, and I know that their reduction is more difficult, if you do not take care of their invasion into their place immediately, which bursts and becomes enlarged due to its internal structure making it difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And so the best disruption is medial, for in that one it's not difficult to reduce the hernia, as it is not difficult in the two mentioned species ahead.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four methods of abdominal suture, and two types of suture are common that agree with sutures of the other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two others are suture methods specific to others diseases, but however they are more specific in the abdominal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you that for every exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the disease is small and a cause of the hernia is through it, making it difficult to reduce it, in one of these methods: either due to the size of the disruption as we have said, or when the hernia becomes swollen due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when it is like that, you should cut into the hernia and immerse a wet sponge in hot water, or take something in cold water, such as cypress and spices, and place them inside that part of the hernia until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And I have seen this done in some cases with a stipulation, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you find the swelling has resolved, then moisten the hernia with water to which alcohol and vinegar are added; because through this, the intestinal content of the patient is somewhat calmed due to a few reasons.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if the patient's intestines are somewhat relieved with this treatment, then cut the disruption slightly with a small instrument on which needles are inserted.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it's appropriate that there should be no dryness, and not a job to dry in need of and lack of food.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, dry his/her shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of his/her shape is sharp, and the other part non-sharp, and its tip subtle, and not to the subtlety of a needle, before it becomes blunt for a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the disease is enlarged and extends outside of the hernia, you should know that its reduction should be according to its natural shape, in its proper place; if it's possible over that, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is wide, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his/her back, place their buttocks with other parts below that; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head and feet higher than the sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should hold your understanding and consideration at all times on this for which the part where the disease is located should be more than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this in large diseases and in medium-sized diseases.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small diseases, have that which you prepared, and do that it is administered by one of your best servants; the one who holds the disruption entirely with their hand and adjusts the lips of them, and then uncover from there to here revealing any cause for another suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one that you take the needle, or count the size of the needle according to the amount of the disease's width; and then lay from the end of the disruption of the index finger, tighten the needle once, or more than that which you do not insert thread in both ends of the cord, between the two ends of the cross where the cords are left inside, so that it penetrates through that part; and you have already added both ends of the cord and both ends of the cross, and they make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tighten the needle twice in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from both parts at once, and add the two lips and disease by gradual addition; and then smooth the thickness of the finger and take another needle in that place, and then tie it with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this until all the tension of the disease is completed within the needles.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be medium between coarseness and subtlety, for subtle needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are of difficult handling in the thread, so you should have them medium in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not have the needle inserted in both ends of the thread close together, for so that the flesh is not pierced too easily and the disease heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the stitches too long to prevent the disease from healing properly.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then pierce the ends of the needles so that they do not slide off the patient's back in its bed; you will place on top of the stitches powdered substances from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; leave them until you know that the disease has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these kinds of suture with needles in a common way are more convenient for small diseases, which until the suture of them may be one needle or two or around that area.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second suture is common: and that you administer during suture all four ends, of the cord and two ends of the cross, in one place, with a needle whose thread envelope has equal subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And once the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that half of the body where it started, so that the pus cavity from that other part will ascend to the wound, making the suture follow a second layer on the cloth, where the cloths are firmly placed.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the amount of this thread's thickness.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch is like the wound that befell a man in his belly where he was wounded by a stone, which was an explosion of the larger wound up to the length of a palm, and it occurred around two palms from my waist's location; it was the break in the middle of the member. And then I returned all but one after the intestine had been removed for xxiv hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around it, and I cured that and he was healed; and then this viscera was treated with rest for several weeks, and he was advised on his actions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors judged that it was not healed; and by a miracle of sorts, as I did not treat that with ointment, which was in the area where ointment could not be found or any medicine either, but I would apply to the wound like every two days and wash it thoroughly with honey water until it became healthy.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And may I describe two of my own types of stitches according to the narrative of Paulus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And this is where you start with the stitch at the end, and insert the needle from that side to that other inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates through the end and inserts those threads according to rectitude and length of the entire body, let the end of the string where you inserted the needle lie; and make the needle penetrate in the other end at the inside part to that outside side on the other end of the limb.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then you make that penetrate another time in that half of the limb's end at the outside part to the inside side; and let the end of the string be like this on this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end of the inside part to the outside side.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration through your own penetration so that you make that penetrate in the string at the end of your tool which is in that side where all of this should penetrate.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And proceed by starting from this side, stitch that at the end which is on the string at the other side of your tool, and remove the needle from the end of the thread which penetrated, then return it in this thread and place that end of the string at the other side on this tool's end; and remove that from the thread which is part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and repeat it after another stitch between which you sew all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of stitching is that you sew with a thread stitch in which you sew the strings, not that you sew the string at one end of the limb's extremity, and let that other stitch lie until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second type of my own stitch which I call Gualia, according to your command and advice, is that you sew it like this some doctors would do, by adding all parts to their corresponding part as per nature; and apply the end of another limb to the other end of him, and this is done according to what I advised you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And when you keep the needle at the end of your tool towards that outside side, make that penetrate in the inside part alone, and leave two ends of the string; and then twist the needle and let that penetrate from outwards to the insides on two ends of the string.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then twist each one of them, and make those inside parts penetrate in the outside part on two ends of your tool other than this opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than the common lighter stitch, and it's a stitch that comes with its own reminder.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the commandment of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And thus some would say, the stomach stitch is corrected with two needles, so you insert into each one of them a thread, and start by inserting your needle from what you should do, make that penetrate between these other sides according to stitches where bodies are equalized.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there's a break in the middle of the stomach, then this stitch is much harder compared to other places in the stomach.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The treatment for wounds follows the judgment of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason for which is when you handle the recent wound at its root before air alters that one, and you return the intestine then sew it up properly, then rest on that powdered flesh.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then rest on that with several ointments which are in your possession until they make hard crust and contain pus; and treat it just as you would treat other wounds until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines ready, then wait on that spot for now, because it begins to bleed, with pus and fluid, and change that twice a day, as you would normally do, until you are healed. When you no longer need other medications in similar situations when the diseases are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the infection might spread to the main limbs, then cover with lion wool submerged in high-quality oil or in rubbed oil, and place that around the areas involved where there are joints, letting it rest on those locations.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in his intestines, which are treated with these remedies, then apply a black stinging ointment made from the root of the wormwood, especially if the infection has reached the intestine and caused an exit that penetrates into the cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what is of the large intestine is a slight purifying pus, while that which is in the finer intestines is different.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to treat the one that is called "gastroenteritis" in which no cure for disease fits; this is due to the large number of veins there are in it and their vastness in those, and due to the subtle nature of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you're dealing with from the disease is a thread-like structure, and if you can obtain that fresh, adjust it according to your judgment as you reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has moved into his space and turned either green or black, then strengthen that with astringent on the area that is affected by him, so that fluids of pain come out, since in the tissue are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then introduce that which is another of that ligament, and suspend the ends of the thread from the starting point of the disease area for you, so that your urge towards him is relieved; you should fasten the tissue and evacuate the pus of the disease.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of diseases when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is disruption in the intestine and it is minor, then it might be resolved in some individuals. This was observed when I saw one who was hit in his abdomen with a lance, and that was the disease from the right side of the stomach; the disease was old and had caused fistula, and discomfort and flatulence were reduced.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	So I pursued the treatment of him even though it was not in the process of healing him, but I carefully focused on where it would heal and the site is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the location already consolidated, feeling for the pain that arises from the bad event in his stomach; and did not suffer any of this disease accident and harmed him with his daily eating and drinking routines, instead he took baths regularly and exercised in his instructions.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when disease occurs in the intestine and is minor, then it can be treated like this: you should take large sticks; next adjust both sides of the disease, and place a stick from those with an open mouth over both sides of the disease; thus when he grabs onto those and tightens his mouth around them, cut off the tip of it, which sticks and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another stick close to the first one, and don't stop doing this by placing sticks one after another according to the amount of the entire disease.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and the disease; break those excess sticks inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient from this treatment.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with very fine material made from the intestinal wall of animals, since it's more resistant; you should take the end of these intestines threads, and if they are cleaned, then place the end of them on this thread, wrapping around it, and insert this thread into needles and materials within this intestine, and reduce that during disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with sticks is merely according to the way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the disease is large and widespread, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, where then there is only a subtle treatment, not full healing.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every disease and abscess when it matures and becomes old, results in a ulcer, which is not consolidated and bleeds constantly, so wherever it is in the body, universally it's named a fistula, and we call this type of wound an ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A true fistula is a hardened, firm, white lesion that does not cause pain and has a cavity as if it's the cavity of a pus-filled wound; for this reason, it's called some tumors, namely inflammation.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some individuals it becomes wet and bleeds; and strong moisture is absorbed within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture turns into pus, it's small, it's thick, and it's subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned this in the division, as I said about diseases, that every ulcer that is not healed and not on bare flesh, is only due to one of these reasons: among them, one reason can be due to lack of blood in the body; or due to evilness in him; or because between him and his skin there's hard flesh preventing natural growth of flesh; or due to pus formation; or if this ulcer itself is filled with pus and the substance that comes out from him is of poor quality; or if the treatment for him is inconvenient; or when corruption sets in in the region, which can lead to plague; or due to local properties like in Saragossa where digestion of maladies is difficult and there's delayed healing of abscesses due to nature; or if there's bone within him or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And this way I will teach you how to do the cure for fistula which is done by operation with my own hands.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of those are fistulas that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or intestines, or bladder, or any part of the backbones, or at any junction formed by such a combination as of hands and chest; and among them, there are some that give proximity to the main limb and resemble it.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among these fistulas that are treated in this manner, they are from the ailments of difficult recovery and not receiving a cure, and working on them is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places that were mentioned, and you hope for its recovery and rely on it, wanting to gain knowledge of it, then try using an arrow or a needle. If the fistula proceeds correctly, then take out what needs to be taken out from it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead. Lead in its lightness of body rises and curves to correct the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is without motion or horror, it's not within your capability to mark it with an arrow.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, prepare the anus through its own natural processes; for the moisture with which you irrigate that area should proceed from the other natural openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And carefully inquire according to the manner in which you are capable of knowing if it is here or a nerve, and whether the extension of the fistula is distant or nearby. Or it's a fistula with its own natural openings, which you examine on all parts of your strength, your investigation, and by examining the patient; considering the meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And once you have stood on all those causes at true stationery, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and then consider if this is an apparent fistula close by or in the belly, distant from junction, nerve, artery, vein, or any other location I've mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then you dry out the fistula as was explained in its birth, and keep this process going from that filtration and decay of flesh, and whatever forms within the opening of tissue, or any part thereof, cure that inside until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of distant depth and proceeds straightly, then proceed by inserting it into the wound until what seems possible for you, and carefully transform it from all its decayed flesh; and administer hot bandages covered in sharp medicines, and introduce those inside the fistula cavity which you have understood through ironing.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with some probing inside, so that the sharp medicine may corrode everything within the cavity of the fistula due to decay.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it doesn't heal through this method, then proceed by cauterizing it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to identify it, then inquire about it and dry it out according to our recommendation. If you do not prohibit any cause related to a vein or nerve or main limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and darkness within it, then extract that part where the corruption has been thoroughly destroyed; and cure that with what nourishes it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed like before in the same way, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and therefore uncover it again thoroughly and carefully make an account of its condition and fleshing out of it with your final strength increase, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, well done; and otherwise, then know that this corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and thus there is nothing for you to do except leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupted and small, or you can pull it with your bare hands, then you do so using delicate forceps suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if they are bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all them, and leave none behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If there is any opposition from moisture or from their location you have no fear of mistake, then incise those ligaments or tissues if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to leave the bones for your time, then pause on the wound so that this wound may occur there, and leave it inside where this is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and keep the wound from being consolidated, and restrain the area you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear, place your hand on the patient's chest submerged in a hot oil, or the hand is submerged in Egyptian balm, or in any of those vert oils. When the sweat begins to emerge and when the bones are separated from them during this process, it brings relief from these tensions.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone like the femur or thigh bone or resembling those, and whatever from them becomes corrupted is only their flesh, then that swelling only behind goes as far as to contain that darkness and corruption, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If whatever from them becomes corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and everything inside that penetrates into the site where the corruption has spread, and then treat that internally until it stabilizes.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you to do what happens in treating a person on their thigh, where you place that as an example and helper for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Treat a young man around 30 years of age who has pain in his thigh, and in the divisions inside there is inflammation within the body where the material has spread to the thigh, it is pus material for large abscesses, and do not attribute this cause to an external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend that period of time according to the error of doctors until the abscess bursts, and remove all the pus matter, and the treatment is adjusted while the change becomes fistulated, and do so with the pus holes where all exude pus and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the surgeons' treatment lasts for about two years, and I did not know much in those days but what was taught to me.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the change in him and what flowed from those holes of his all over the body; and by then, that man's condition was entirely stabilized and his complexion was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the needle into one of those holes and pushed it through to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the holes closely and found that they reached them from every part of the tissue.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I opened and incised into one of those holes where I discovered a part of the bone, and removed that corrupted material, which was already earthy and corrupted and degraded; and it had become corrupted in some parts of the tissue through which it had penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And I tightened that which was discovered by me and prepared from the bone that was revealed.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I concluded that it wasn't the bone but that corruption which was causing and tightening it up; and I had already removed that.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then for a long time treated the wound with consolidating medicines, but did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I re-opened and discovered again on the bone after its initial discovery, removing continuous corruption from the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I tightened what appears to me from that corruption, and then proceeded to make the treatment of him and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered on him another time and did not cease to gradually penetrate the bone carefully making small cuts and restoring him, but it was not restored until I penetrated about a palm away from him, and I extracted his marrow, and then treated that with medicines, and it was only slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for repetition in the operation of this man or section for it only requires the position of his bile duct and for his strength and breath to tolerate, which he experienced at all times due to excess expulsion leading to bad collapse.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And then he is healed through complete healing, and nothing replaces the hard flesh in the bone; it makes good use of him within his body and returns his vigor to him; it adapts to his movements and does not go against him in movement or cause harm in any case.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If it is bone that has been traumatized in the body's location, then follow this method to proceed: you should take hold of that ligament and strengthen it at the end of that prominent bone, and instruct someone to extend it there. Take out a layer of woolen thread from the first ligament; place this over the flesh left by the bone, and extend the end so that you can pull on the remaining flesh towards those left parts, then uncover the flesh on the location which you want to tighten so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a pole or table under that bone appropriately, so when you do this, the saw is not prohibited to cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cut the saw to tighten on that corrupted spot little by little, so if it's in the cavity of the corroded bone and doesn't appear with its manifestation in feeling, force another opening for the tightening.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it continues from one part to another, and corruption is at its mid section or in any part of him, then you uncover all flesh from all parts; and then place a pole under that, and proceed with sawing from the first part where the corruption is, so that continuation of the tightening on the other part occurs.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the tightening according to the location of the corruption just a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not due to their natural function but to some obstruction.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or on the chest, it's very difficult; however, you should inquire about how the corruption manifests itself to you, and then remove that area once you've done an incision, demonstrating each step according to every possible arrangement which suits you, and adjusting each organ as per your command when not against your will, ensuring no veins or nerves are harmed.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Know what the penetrators and the saws to penetrate these bones are very much according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their thickness, and the subtlety and size and minuteness of those, as well as their hardness and their rarity; thus that you prepare for every type of operation suitable instrument convenient for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Know that you should understand the operation on this specialty regarding the type of instrument for which you would need; when you have great study, long experience and knowledge of these methods in this art, and testimony from various ways of illnesses, whereupon then you already have them under your control, to which you choose what is suitable for each tool among all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will guide you towards the end of this chapter to know the number of tools that you will prepare, similar to which you'll proceed with your prohibition which you'll experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Type of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Type of other saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a file (for metal working):
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The tip of this file should be according to the shape of a star key head, and its points should be according to the shape of the points of an astelfegi (a type of metalworking tool).
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And only allow for the contact between those parts to become smooth when they are corrupted, or that the opening is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger knives for others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller knives:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the lateral knives:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another properly made saw: it should have an arc above the pus and the sharpness of iron, with its handle being a decently descending member.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the knives in which there's a hollowing out:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle knife:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-end knives:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small trimming tools resembling tongs:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of cutting instruments with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutting instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting tool; this one resembling a file, and its end like a saw, it is exhibited in various locations according to the position of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a file that corresponds to the one which penetrates through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It's made of Indian iron, similar to all the causes we've mentioned about knives, cutting instruments and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the ends of cutting (or perforation) and for closing the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends can be pressed or due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic reason, or because of the treatment you've given that corruption with those medicines and the cure doesn't work, or sometimes the corruption continues from that body without any cause, then you should cut that limb into that place where the infection has reached, so the patient escapes through this death or malady which is a greater misfortune than the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign for that which happens, is when the limb becomes black inside it has burned out or if you place the blackness near that it has spread into that limb and consumed all within it; thus take heed with your cutting of that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it's caused by the impact of some venomous causes such as from a sea scorpion or from venom or from a snakebite and others like these.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you cut through the finger and do not give space for the corruption so that it extends into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you cut that from the edge of the elbow, and do not give space for corruption to spread into the upper arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it penetrates there, then you cut through the arm at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes elsewhere near the elbow, then death for the patient is there; treating with other remedies in this case is an abundance of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the chest when corruption reaches the nipple area of the breast, then you cut that near one of the nipples.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it spreads to the bottom part of the chest, then you cut the whole breast area.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it penetrates into the navel, then you cut the abdomen at the navel joint area.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread up to the navel, then there's no remedy but death, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting the limb or sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament at the place you want to cut, and hold another ligament over the spot. Extend your assistant's hand with one ligament on either side of the place left out, and extend their other hand with another ligament across its sides; then you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments all the way down until the entire flesh is exposed; then cut or saw it off accordingly.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And when placed, make sure a cloth covers them from all sides so that it does not touch the area there, and that the injury goes to the patient's side properly and the abscess is cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If during your work you encounter bleeding from the wound, then cauterize that area carefully, or place some strengthening powders on them to help heal the wound; and soon after return to your medical treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the affected member rest properly at his convenience, and take care of that until he is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you what happened to one person in his foot, this incident that I and you have discussed, which occurs to him with blackness in his foot under circumstances that were assembled to the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred in his right foot, spreading throughout the leg.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepared himself to undergo pus surgery because the healing process progressed within his leg with the intensity of his pain and suffering. He incised that foot into the joint, and he recovered.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago this corrupt incident occurred in the right hand of him.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it reached me, and I must consider reflecting that excess with what has accumulated on his hand from the medicines, affecting the transformation of his body; and the excess does not recur but begins to spread into another hand starting where it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he urged me to cut his hand, and I do not want to do that fearing the impact of that excess, much more fearing the cutting of his hand, which was about healing.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he became aware of me, he returned to his land and it reached me that this person prepared and cut his entire hand, and he recovered.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not recounted this story merely for amusement on this sickness, and its meaning is what it signifies and according to which it was performed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the treatment of sinus and quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When gangrene occurs in fleshy limbs and the area of the gangrene is extended until it collects pus, then breaks and perforates, and discharges the pus out, leaving the place empty as if it was a vessel, and the membrane that was covering it also as a fine cloth, and it does not reach deeper corruption, nor spreads into bones or nerves, it's called a sinus, and it is not named as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the area is extended so that corruption begins in any limb, then it's called a fistula and I won't use other terms.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for that is to cut that membrane entirely as it has moved, especially when it's delicate and done like a thin cloth, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the membrane will stick and that corruption has not achieved deeper consequences through subsequent stages, then in the membrane a cut has been made from face to backside, then you treat that with enemas.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider it as a sinus, and if it's large, the arm that releases odor, then enema with an Egyptian medicine made from oil and vinegar mixed in equal parts, they should be placed in a vessel, and placed over the fire until the medicine heats up and spreads throughout the mixture of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And soon you take what is necessary from him and dissolve it in water with honey; then perform an enema with that on the sinus, strengthen his orifice, and leave the medicine inside him for the amount of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And soon remove that through pressure; do this for several days until the sinus is transformed and the pus has been drained.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some times enema with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and you take the ashes of wood, put them in water; then boil that and perform an enema on it while you're convinced that the sinus is gone now.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the body does not tolerate this Egyptian medicine nor water of ash, then perform an enema with water and honey that is mixed with vinegar, and perform an enema with vinegar and honey mix, for which property of honey transforms and washes, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when in the wine there is excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And as you do this for some times and you're convinced that the sinus has been drained, then perform an enema with that which gives birth to flesh in him.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take of the dyaphanic ointment and dissolve that in rubbed oil and vinegar; or perform an enema with some medicines and other ointments which have properties that I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus' orifice is narrow where no catheter can be inserted into the enema, then you gradually enlarge that with small metal tools, and stop in the wax-covered area with Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it's enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add his lips with stitches and leave him the quantity in which an enema fits inside.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the arm flows is raised to its upper parts, then dry that in the area with pus below where it's located so that the arm can flow into them. When the arm is constricted within the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the bone in the vicinity of pus as you wish, then pierce it preparing the member for this procedure so that it flows from him with a slight movement according to what suits you and without leaving any cause of the arm retained in him.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidative medicines that are placed on the sinus conveniently at where you want, extend those above the linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity that it allows communication with the entire sinus; then insert the scalpel diagonally in the right side of the sinus opening, making an ample but slight incision to prevent pus from entering the sinus opening; then spread on another piece of linen cloth the lion's ointment according to the amount of the incision, and place it far from the sinus opening for the elbow's fluid discharge, not letting the cloth get too large. Change this only every few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Let the one who is over the sinus opening adjust it constantly, for he should prevent any fluid from escaping as suitable to him regarding the patient's elbow.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And in order for you to know whether what flows from his elbow is much or little, if it is digestible or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment continues in this manner, you will notice that the substance being discharged over the sinus opening has started to adhere or gains adherence, then you may carefully remove or loosen it each day, and when you remove the wound, replace the linen cloth with a new one and apply fresh ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Let it be if around the sinus there is ample space for the virus to spread, then do not discard the patient's healing, which takes time in such cases, as it can vary depending on whether some individuals take longer to heal their wounds or if something opposite happens.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the elbow remains swollen for several days with indigestion, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if adhering to the sinus takes a long time as the cause prolongs, then adjust in drying of the medicines. If the medicines are wet from their substance and lose their effectiveness, dry them like lion's ointment when they have adjusted excess addition of oiliness.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last advice for the one being treated is to take lion's ointment and dissolve it in lightly roasted oil, apply it on their elbow as usual with its substance, gently place that on them, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And already simulates that action when there is no elbow, apply lion's ointment and honey when you mix them together to thicken it, use this on them; or take myrrh and aloes and mix them all up, then grind them over the honey while heated in a pot, apply this on linen and strengthen that on the sinus; and apply that with the thickened honey from which you mixed it, then grind it further on linen and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes you administer to them the aristocratic mixture made from celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and wheat flour, as well as Centaurium, using these simple remedies or adjusting them. Crush those, sift them, mix them with the previously mentioned honey; then use this on them.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus continues for a long time and is not cured by this treatment, then you know that corruption is in him, already it investigates within the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with tubercular therapy as stated above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Regarding the treatment of ingrowing nails and cuticles, addition of a digit incision, and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Ingrowing nail is an abscess that leaves the skin of the digit's palm or sole, and forcefully grows the nail in other digits. If treatment extends for a long time and becomes costly, it might be treated by cautering, may become corrupted, then dig out the nail root while corroding its base, forcefully remove all corruption, penetrate its decay into the bone giving off a fetid smell, then amputate the end of that digit, and the color turns black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so, when you have that as we said in the division and if your treatment doesn't work, then dig out all the excess that has accumulated from the nail bed and apply cautery near it, because active cautery is beneficial in this situation.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Let it be if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the nail's additions have already absorbed the flesh from inside, start to prick him and guide that, then dig out that flesh near it. Let it be if you place a thin thread at the angle of the nail where you prick the flesh, push that towards above and cut into that flesh for ease, let it rest on what remains from the flesh with burning corrosive medicines penetrating inside until it is fully healed; then treat that with ointments when it is cured.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	Let it be if corruption has already spread into the bone, then let it be that you cut out the bone where it is present and extract it, for there's no cure that can work when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice the corrosion and corruption going into the digit, then let it be that you cut out part of it according to where its memory is pressed, and treat that inside when it's healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If on the nail bed there is a percussion or an incision, and if there is a severe pain in that area, then you should begin by making bleeding incisions on the patient from the start, and afterwards cleanse the nail bed with a sharp point across it horizontally below him/her. Be sure to prevent the section from penetrating into the tissue where the nail is left, because this will cause intense pain for the patient, resulting in the development of unnecessary excess flesh at that location; then cure that area by addressing the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	It is known as 'adjusted', which appears in the hands of some men. It makes the flesh very thick and also makes bones hard, or it affects the nails themselves.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Such conditions are found in the root of the joints, or they are the natural state of things among the knuckles of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that appears in the knuckles of the finger is not bad, but the one that appears near the joints makes trouble.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who have fatty flesh, the section is slight; you should make an incision there in a horizontal line.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	It is known that what appears at the root of the joint makes treatment difficult; so be careful to avoid amputation.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When it's the natural state of things at the knuckles of the fingers, you should make an incision when you start by cutting through the flesh with a round incision into the bone. Then use one of those suitable saws for that purpose and cure inside until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation which happens to the fingers among their usual places or due to the nature of the person who suffers from it, or due to consolidation caused by sickness or by fire burning, or due to any similar reason, then you should remove that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And between their usual places, you should cover them with cloths dipped in rubbed oil so that they do not consolidate easily, and separate these areas from each other, or place a thin sheet of lead between them where consolidation occurs as you do.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs on the fingers on the palm side, then you should dry that consolidation according to its preparation and make it fit into the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From incisions due to vice, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose veins, and they are thick, full of melancholic excesses which occur in the places of the body's limbs, especially on the legs of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	So when you administer the heart purge of the black plague in some places with strong expulsion, then proceed to bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The method of curing them with iron is according to two ways: one way is that it should be cut and that the black blood be drained out. The other way is that the vein should be elevated and all of it extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the thing is according to this way: take from the start the joint in water and inside where the thick blood is resolved, which becomes turbid in the joint, then strengthen the joint of the patient at the lower part of their thigh up to the bottom edge of their inner leg within a bend, and afterwards drain the vein in one place or two, or three with broad sections, and then raise the black blood above your hand from the lower edge of the joint inside and above it, until you get rid of the desired quantity of it, which will tolerate the power of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then direct that person to avoid those food items causing the black plague.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue with bloodletting when the veins are full, and you notice it in the patient's thigh.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them is according to this way: if you cut the joint in the thigh where there are skin lumps, then immerse it in warm water and bathe the patient's leg with hot water until they turn red and the veins become swollen; or if you cannot have a bath available, then let the body be scraped if the member is shaved.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the incision in the direction of the vein for section at the long or at the rear of it; or if you're at its base, apply the antiseptic there, or if at its posterior part, use the salve.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the incision with scissors and cleanse the vein from all sides until you feel the pulsation, it is necessary that you observe this feeling when it declines to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you've drained and of the incision, check if there's a white string which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that line inside so it's elevated and hangs from the incision; hang it on an oak branch or a wooden rod.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three fingers, and clean the incision from the part above the vein until you see it.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that and cut it in the last section near the base, and remove that and lift it until it's visible through the second section; and then remove that from the section above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you remove that from the section which is at the very top or any other of all the sections, until everything becomes visible; then cut that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you don't want to remove and elevate it, then insert a needle of strong double thread into it and pull out the needle, or insert that string into your hand and turn your hand in every direction so that it hangs.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And make sure it doesn't leak; for if it breaks, you will find it hard to lift that part and the wound will occur on the patient's body through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that oil has leaked out, then place over the area of the wound wool submerged in vinegar and oil mixed with unripe olive oil, and oil that hasn't been mixed. Then cure within what is being treated until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is constricted with excessive curvature around which it encircles the parts, and does not follow straightness as we have said, then you must make cuts across that area in all parts of its curvature, and in the areas where it is enclosed by him. Then suspend that under a rope within which you lift that whole thing.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And you must guard your section so that you do not pierce the vein and do not harm that area, as it will be difficult for you to lift that part. Use your caution in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision when the vein is being made dry:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a horseshoe cut:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be as hot for the patient as with normal cuts nor have a sharp tip so that it does not harm the vein; and it should be of considerable flexibility. If it is too subtle, it will cut into the vein because of its subtlety. It should have this superfluous thickness as we said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Regarding the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the cavities on southern lands, as at Atagi in the region of Arabs and in the dry southern lands of little fertility, where neither grass nor crops grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is generated in other locations in the body besides these cavities.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the process of it is like decay that leaves you with a chain-like sensation throughout your body, as well as poison inside your body, snakes, worms, maggots and parasites creating within the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the potential occurrence of this is when you feel inflammation in the area where this vein occurs; and then that place swells; and then, from the area of that inflammation, a vein begins to emerge that looks like it's rooted from the ground.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	The text translates to: "And when you see the extremity of that, then take care that you cover it with a piece of lead weighing as much as one dragon. Within two dragons', and lay this down, and hang the lead suspended from the chest."
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as times the patient's cause affects the parts outside, you surround this with lead and place it there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the disease is prolonged, then you must cut out a part of it and wrap what remains; do not cut through that spot directly within which is buried, for if you cut through there it will contract and penetrate into the flesh, causing pus formation and infection at the site and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And you must treat it gently and extract it little by little, so that all of it is removed from the rear of the body and there is no effect of the cause within the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein extends in some people up to their waist or even further, and I've already treated one that was nearly 20 palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then you must introduce the needle into the patient's artery and perforate that along a long artery within the body, so that all that is in the matter is removed. Then administer decay of the area for several days with medicines; afterwards treat that through wound healing of pus collections.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has swollen veins, especially when it appears in the junction of the chest or in the chest, and causes the patient's outlets to swell, and is present from any outlet opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And treat that as we said in the division and about what was mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the operation on worms generated under the skin, it is called cow sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some regions as cow sickness because it afflicts many cattle and one worm that is native between the skin and flesh, moves up and down throughout the body, and manifests itself like sensations through member to member, causing disruption of the skin and pus to come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the decay of some fluids, such as when worms, snakes, roundworms and hookworms occur in the abdomen.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is found due to the mischief of this, when it travels in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the nostrils. Then there is a strong smell in you, which destroys the nostril and affects many swollen veins.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to treat and extract it, do so only if you notice its presence and emergence in the sensation. Then cover with what is above it and what remains behind it symmetrically and intense constriction, and afterwards dry over it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is present in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery with fire on the area where it lives, and the main cause that is feared is decay of it which destroys the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you find it reaching close to the nostril near the head, then press on the eyebrow with firm tension, and afterwards dry over it, and extract it; cover that the patient uses modification of their body with medicines expelling bad decaying fluids, and beware of foods causing decay.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of dividing over the sickness of illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called 'nafir' in our land, and it's pain that affects some body parts, and then spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen the second one that I will tell you about.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was summoned to treat a female patient in a village, and I noticed a small swelling on the vein of her arm. After an hour when it was heated, I saw that the swelling moved up like a worm moving up, but somewhat more gently than if you were pinching it, as if it were living silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I felt the pain in that spot and stayed there for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then continued into the other part of the body where it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was told that it moved throughout her entire body as I saw; and I was too amazed by the exchange and speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my patients according to that manner, but I have seen movements where the pain is being exchanged from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it like this among the patients as with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think it is just like this because the woman was pregnant, as there are veins and exposed vessels in the body, and this appears with that sensation of the circulating wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies full of swollen veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want to treat her, and the patient feels this pain, then it does not seem like this among the people we have said, so you should strengthen over that and leave her a little and dry over that area where there is this constrained wind, and apply heat there, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not find it among your patients, then treat that for congestion of the body and for what you are releasing winds, and heal those with fetid pills and with serapi pills and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the removal of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are varied according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they are found. Their variety is that some have large points, others small, concave, dull, solid; there are those with three angles, and those that have tongues; and those that are spines.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the buttocks where I find them is done in two ways: when they are members or main parts with concavities, as in the brain, heart, stomach, lungs, liver, kidneys, and intestines, among others. Therefore, when you encounter one of these members and see signs of death, which I will explain further on, then consider avoiding the removal of that arrow in those where death has occurred in the most important positions, and when you do not observe such bad symptoms from them, and if the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then remove that arrow and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of poisoning occur when you find it in the arrow, and pierces through the bone, and is set free from the skull which is above the brain, which happens due to violent vomiting, blindness, dizziness, coldness in the limbs, swelling and fever in the tongue, convulsions, disturbance of understanding and nausea from anger, weakness, the word becomes detached and speech is destroyed. And it appears as a white damp location resembling dust at the wound site, with symptoms indicating moisture akin to wetness of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you observe these symptoms, then refrain from treatment and the removal of the arrow, unless it is outwards.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The symptoms of the arrow when found in the heart, if it is close to the left breast, and sensed at that spot where it is set into hard flesh, not being able to see the wound from the outside; and the movement of the arrow feels like a movement of the pulse, and runs along the wound with a black stain, and causes coldness in the extremities, moisture on the skin, fainting; and so you know that death descends throughout the body.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lungs include a feeling of suffocation from frothy blood at the wound, and the veins near the neck become distended, and the color of the skin changes, they breathe large amounts of air and request for breath.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if you find the arrow in the vest that is on the legs, and the pain then lies close to the small ribs, it causes a great intense pain and sighing, and does not affect all parts of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find the arrow in the stomach, then from the wound there comes a feeling of bloating with undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you find the arrow in the belly and it is stuck there, a hole appears from the wound, or the skin, or the intestine which has been ruptured, and there is no hope for curing it by removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow finds its way into the bladder and causes urine to appear outside it, or triggers some cause leading parts outwardly, and there is pain over the body, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May the other members as well, such as the face, the neck, and the back, and the shoulders and the ribs, and the vertebral column of two, and the sternum, and the pelvis, and the shape of their limbs be saved according to the major dispositions when the dart does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisonous dart.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that which I have observed about these darts, so that you may understand the treatment for this.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is the case where someone is hit by an arrow in the eye socket of their cheek under the nose, and I extract that arrow from them on the opposite side, leaving the ear's wax for you, and they heal, and no damage occurs in your nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extract another dart from a Jew which hits him in his ear's wax, leaving the eyelid behind, and the dart was already hidden so that one could not obtain it from that without getting a small tip to which it adhered, it was a large dart among the darts of the Turks, made of iron where there were no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it is the Jew, and no damage occurs in his ear from a bad incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extract another arrow from a Christian man which was hit in the back, and it was an Arab dart, and that is the one with ears; then I incised on that between two ribs, and was already submerged in the patient's back; then I sharpened to that, and then extracted that, and the Christian heals.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extract another arrow from a man which was hit in his abdomen, and considered that he would die with that; then, given that it had passed thirty days and there was no change based on any of the reasons for his disposition, I incised on the dart and inserted something into that, and he heals, and no accident happens to him from this.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow hit his back, and the wound has become fixed on him, and since then about seven years, extract the dart from under the rib.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who was hit in her abdomen by an arrow, and the wound has become fixed inside her, and it is not changed in any of her natural operations, and the woman does not experience any damage in some of her natural procedures.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man to whom an arrow hit his face, and the wound has become fixed here, not causing any pain or marks like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extract the arrow from the king's prince man which was hit in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side, it was hidden completely.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment near the place where the arrow was embedded within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I felt the wound of the dart pulling outwards; and then I inquired about that with a subtle test, and did not feel it; but he felt the puncture on his right ear, and so I suspected that that puncture was for the tip of the dart.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And applied the place with an adhesive and digestive paste, confirming to me that this location is where we should adhere it so that I can see the location of the dart, in order to proceed upon that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no damage occurs at the significant location that you have obtained that spot; and I continue applying the paste on him for several days without any incident; and the wound becomes fixed, and reduces the patient's ability to move by about several days until I feel the dart inside his nose and report this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I placed a quick-dissolving medicine on the wound for several days until it opened, and upon this test, I heated it, and felt the tip of the dart which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted during the opening of the wound by that quick medicine until it became visibly clear to me the tip of the dart, and spent time with this for about four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then as the wound was enlarged, it became possible for me to insert forceps into him, refine that, and did not experience pain during this. So I no longer continued refining and working on that with methods of engineering until one day on that, using methods of gripping with forceps downwards according to the shape of those at the end of the dart, then extracting that; and then restoring that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, and I restored that and the wound has become fixed, and the patient heals with complete health, and there is no damage to him from any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you about the quality of extracting some darts so that you follow this rule and significance about what I have not said, concerning these parts of this art and definitions of that, they are not understood from the narrative nor do they comprehend that freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans wisely compare with few on motion; and about what is presented compared to what is absent; and discovers new operation and new tool when accidents happen in the causes of foreign arts.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that darts are not forcefully taken out of the limbs in which they are stuck, but according to two ways: or by piercing the place where it enters; or against the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is driven through the spot goes in, or it's pulled from a meaty location, and it's thrown out and driven away.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you don't follow the advice of allowing it to rest for a few days after eating until the meat around it has settled and healed, then you should let it heal internally, alleviating the pain and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it happens in bones and you don't follow the advice, then let that heal for a few days and repeat the process of applying heat and movement every day, and it will be driven out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you don't follow your own advice for such days, then it's likely that you will puncture within the path of the arrow through all parts of the bone in fine travel, so that the place becomes enlarged with the arrow, and then remove that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has proceeded into one of the chambers of the brain, causing these kinds of accidents as I've said, then refrain from removing the arrow and leave it until its presence becomes equal to several days; should the arrow reach the eye, then death will not be prolonged for them.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck only in the body of the bone and does not enter the eye, but stays in the head for several days, and no accident occurs to it due to any cause, then you should consider the process of removing the arrow and its removal.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is moving and you do not follow your removal process, then you should administer travels in the path of the arrow as we have recommended, and care for the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is already hidden in the body location, and it escapes your feeling, then you should try to locate it with your touch, and if you feel it, then pull it out with movements that are suitable for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot get to it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the prey, and here it is not bone or nerve or vein, then you cut into the wound until it becomes enlarged and making extraction of the arrow possible.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is stuck in the fatty tissue around them, then you deliver the flesh in which it is located from all sides to every tool that can be used; consider this situation too, if you cannot remove the removal of the flesh at the break of these fatty tissues and within their twisting until you succeed.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the removal of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps from all sides until it obeys; and subtlety with utmost subtlety that the arrow does not break and that it makes for a difficult extraction of both and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that in your time, then you leave for several days until the parts that are in its path settle, and repeat this process when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if you experience difficulty in blood flow, then you administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your skill from the start of vein or nerve or string, and apply tools in every possible way for removing the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, speed and firmness as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And when you force the arrow back by itself so that the head follows the figure according to which you must place the setting of the arrow in it, it is better for healing.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible to you, then you administer what is possible to you by the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And for arrows that are driven out against the other side, or that have already proceeded some distance towards the external parts from them, or if there is an increase in hardness at the tip of the arrow by feeling higher up from where they end, then you should feel about it; and when the section matches the quantity in which forceps would be used; and then pull it out, since it responds to reason.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you twist your hand against opposition until the arrow penetrates into the bone and enlarge yourself, and then remove that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for several days, and repeat this process until you feel it.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push that towards it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft is stuck and you want to administer impulse, then you insert that, if it's silent, hit the hollow part so that inside the cavity of it in the neck of the arrow, and then push that towards it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then you push that with strong impact inside it, as the arrow is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded deep in the flesh, then you should hollow out all the tissue where the wound is, if it's possible for you to do this, and then treat that with what seems appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or on the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, then feel about it and if possible remove it from there. And avoid touching veins or nerves, then remove that arrow, and later cover the wound if necessary, and treat that until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The method of using forceps where the arrows are inserted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let their tips be like the beak of a pincers that are made like a saw when they take hold on the arrow, thus not letting it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those are made special spots, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its hardness, as well as the width of the wound, and the constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form the concave pusher at this curved end like a beak so that it relieves the inner part of the arrow in you, and push with that flat one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of the pusher at the blunt end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a ray so that it relieves the inside in the concave arrow, and it is pushed towards that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Regarding phlebotomy of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy which usually need to be bled, are around .xxx,. which are in the head at .xvi,. These are two pulsating veins, they're close to the temples, called auriculars by Alhasisain; two branches that are in both temples noticeable; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two nostrils which are called aspissures; and a vein prepared at the mid-point of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two jugulars that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and - these are the veins called algecile; and they're two veins that leave the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	These are the veins that are usually bled from at the wrists, they're .v,. One of those is a cephalic vein, it's located in the wild heart; and the people call it "the head vein", and flat, it's a medium-sized vein, and composed from a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic; and they call that the commoners "the whole body vein", and basilica is a vein which is placed at the domestic heart, and called "citillar", and they call that the vulgar "the belly vein"; and wrist vein, it's placed over the flexor, and that's the one where phlebotomy is performed, and that appears above the elbow by a manifest appearance; and small intestine, it's the vein between what we just called auricular and very small vein, and they are in both branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the chest and the ribcage there are three veins; one of those is that leaves the curvature of the wrist heart; and the second is sophena, its location is near the ribcage of the domestic heart; and sciatic vein, its location is near the wrist heart; and in the ribcage are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youth of the veins that are near the temples is to be considered in the old aural catarrs, emigraemia and bleeding ulcers of an ancient head disease.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of seeing those is according to what I recommend to you: that it be red on the top of the head of illness, and that the head of illness be rubbed in the back of the neck at the location of both veins with a broad cloth for good friction; then strengthen the body's neck by having a bend inside which appear the two and the locations near the temples are approximately below the two bumps at the bottom of the head; and feel that on your said, and if you feel the pulse of those on your said, there is indication here to try.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the surgical knife, and that is the one which pierces downward, then you insert your finger into the vein in the neck where the phlebotomy flows to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand towards the vein and neck up to the parts above, and cut into the vein at an angle downwards.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the cut be either two fingers or close to that amount; and let blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with powders and leave it inside until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And this has been discussed previously in the introduction of this book about the incision of those and their cautery treatment.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The youth of the two arterial veins at phlebotomy is in old emigraemia and bad domestic illness, frequent ophthalmia, and chest diseases with acute excesses flowing out from the nostrils.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those is according to what I recommend to you: strengthen the body's neck with a movement where both veins are felt by manifest appearance, and show that you can feel the pulse at your said location; then you will have indication here to try.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the neck over the vein up to your indicated location, and insert the phlebotomy downward, and raise the vein up there; and cut it in this way as you have done with the other veins; and let blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the neck, place your said over the vein for an hour, and pause over that knot and powders, strengthen it from a strong constriction, and leave it inside until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And this recollection of them, as well as the incision and laceration, has been detailed in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	When performing the first sentence of bloodletting for facial veins, it approaches the venipuncture of the cephalic vein in old facial ailments and migraines, as well as inflammation and infected ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the bloodletting for you is according to what I recommend to you; so, when the patient strengthens his collar with a bend where the vein appears; and then takes the instrument which is named 'fossor', whose form is this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point of the 'fossor' over that vein and strike on it with your hand or some other tool in the manner you do, let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then carefully close the wound in the patient and strengthen that area so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some veins are opened during bloodletting but one should not let the bloodletting be of an acute extremity like other bloodlettings, rather it is on the lateral extremity, and that particular bloodletting according to the cross, where bone proximity makes it robust; if this bloodletting were subtle, it would break through in the patient.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the youth of both veins that are in the tear ducts of two eyes through pus from the eyes and by inflammation, as well as in the cheeks, and for facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of bloodletting is when the patient strengthens their neck with a bend, and then perform bloodletting there, standing above them.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And when the bloodletting is done according to the transverse direction along its length for a few with bloodletting points, where there is no flesh in that place; and if the bloodletting point is subtle, it makes the extremity of that strong.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as necessary and place over those veins, hold them for a night, and carefully close that area.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the bloodletting of the facial veins is recommended for acute fever and strong heat, as well as facial illnesses and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the bloodletting for you is that your neck strengthens and places its nose against your left hand, take the subtle long bloodletting and place it in the middle location of the nasal cavity according to straightness, where the vein does not appear here, and when the blood begins to flow shortly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Make sure to end your hand on the small bloodletting gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then close that area for a night, as that is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the youth of the bloodletting of the two guides lead to constriction of the air and the beginning of leprosy, as well as bad skin ailments, itching, and corrosive ulcers, along with hyperthermia.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the bloodletting for those is that your neck strengthens each one on its collar with a bandage; and place the doctors on the head of the neck, and let the neck lie on a pallet.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform bloodletting along the length with a broad, small bloodletting gradually; and remove the blood according to season quantity or according to what you need times it; and make it as if for another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the bandage and strengthen both veins with a mid-strength compression so that your neck is not overheated, and leave it in place until the illness is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The youth of the bloodletting for the alerich veins corresponds to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, decay of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and on your face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of bloodletting for those veins is that you cut in front of the neck and strengthen its neck with a bend, then turn your head to observe both lips where one vein is on the right side of the lip and the second is on the left; each demonstration by each is through the darkness of each from both sides, and more so when in their circuit are small black veins; then you pierce each by incision perpendicular.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubt and do not know which one among them is, then you understand the incision of the most significant one, and the pus that is evident from those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it as if for the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to pierce both veins that are on the lip that you have.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are in your tongue show the bloodletting of the cephalic vein around the preheated points that are in the gullet, as well as throat illnesses, and mouth ailments.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of performing bloodletting for these is that follow the neck between your most forward on the solar plexus, lift the tongue from them, observe the tongue, from each side of its vein and the other side's vein, and the color of each declines to darkness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform bloodletting for any one; and be aware that you do not end your hand on the bloodletting ones, as those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your veins that are bloodletted in the armpit are in those where pain is usual for all people, and their bloodletting is done according to two ways: or they place on bloodletting points of myrtle or olive with subtleness decreasing; or they cut with a bloodletting instrument, and it's called an incision; this is its form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This rest is what you need to focus on, and there are special techniques within it that are detailed and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of lung puncture:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the cushion of the patient be in this position, and you should open the full, visibly large, convex veins, and at those that contain large hard stones.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive lung puncture:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This type of lung puncture is narrower in width and has a more subtle extremity, it's suited for puncturing subtle veins that contain small citrus-like stones.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Let the young patient for the lung puncture of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: extract the stone from the maladies that leave the gallbladder and liver, as well as that from which the feet and belly are affected.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And when performing that lung puncture, the operator should hold it firmly there and be over-tired in that position, as long as they are applying pressure on the patient's artery, if they err or adjust during the puncture procedure, that artery will bleed and blood will flow out, so ensure not to pierce the artery with a lung puncturing tool before doing anything else, especially when you're ready for surgery.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear through an obvious manifestation, then know that you should leave it and try another area, or search for any nearby branch; or do a lung puncture in place of where your hand ends on the arm, which is visible. Perform this lung puncturing technique as we have described up until now during surgery.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform the lung puncture of the meteysa (lung), then place yourself in front of the constriction on the arm where you recognize the location of the pulse, and move your hand gently over it. Then adjust the position of the arm and perform this on the concave area with a lung puncturing tool as we have said; be careful to do so within the space around the artery without pressing too hard.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you apply force, using your strength, inflate the area that you have moved over gently with your hand. Then that inflation is an indication of the presence of an artery there, so avoid it accordingly.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the stone flows during lung puncture like urine in children, and it's small and hard, then you know that it belongs to the stone of an artery; and then hold your hand over that gently for a long distance. And adjust your position, and once the stone is removed, where there are marks that indicate its removal, then lift your arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch over the patient's recovery from their wound, and be extra cautious of them and don't let it heal too quickly for a few days until they're fully recovered.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the stone is not removed, and you should not give medicine as it's present, then you'll be cutting into an artery, if that appears to you; for its extremity contracts, and the stone is removed. Or take a slightly longer pulse, apply it on the area of the vein at the constriction down towards the arm and under the powdery skin by another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the stone is removed then it's good; and otherwise, treat that according to what was described in the memory of the removal of powdery substances that bleed.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And removing the stone from there is difficult in narrow positions for the area of the wound and the possibility of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Of the dark vein lung puncture is young as it extracts the stone from the upper part of the head and below the chest; for this reason because it consists of branches of the basilic vein and of cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And when lung puncturing the operator should hold it firmly in this lung puncture of yours, as long as that thing is a nerve; then adjust during the lung puncturing procedure and if you find a nerve, it will cause your patient to lose consciousness, making healing difficult for them, and strong it won't be completely healed. This nerve can be felt by touch; and if hidden in some people and it's subtle and not visible, then know that when lung puncturing the part of the middle, avoid touching the nerve with your strength, instead move on from the middle area as instructed earlier.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The method for lung puncturing the cephalic vein is to extract stone from the head and alleviate chest ailments.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And when you do this properly, if you want the lung puncture tool to pierce in an olive lung puncturing or a mirti lung puncturing; that is the saved metal of all veins, which doesn't leave your artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	And indeed, you should perform lung puncture in such a way that when using the lung puncturing tool, you don't just pierce the head of the lump alone, but search for the least obvious spot and don't let it be noticeable, unless it is detected by the initial palpation where there are marks during lung puncturing.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	And indeed, strength should be applied in some individuals, when lung puncturing is not done in the first palpation, but it's not noticeable under that lump.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of lung puncture from that and the complications arising from it require careful consideration in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first concern is that you must know whether or not to administer phlebotomy only when health preservation and the hope for the patient are maintained, as well as caution against future illnesses. You should perform phlebotomy on one of these veins located in the thigh: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and perform phlebotomy at the start of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and around winter when there is an indication of overfilling.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be performed until three hours have passed since the first drop of sweat during the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy should be administered as long as it produces convenience and need, whether at night or during the day, in any hour and throughout time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it's to be known that an infant should not undergo phlebotomy until they are 14 years old, and a pregnant woman should not receive phlebotomy within the first three months up until the seventh month, elderly people should not undergo phlebotomy if they have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to undergo phlebotomy for any reason, it's to be known that they should change their organs before the phlebotomy with leonid juice, if in those there is a retained wound, so that the veins do not draw excess from them during the phlebotomy of the organs, which are purified, and do not send anything to the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not subject patients to unnecessary phlebotomy or from weakness, illness, or drunkenness when their condition has not improved as expected, nor from diseases of the stomach, and more that phlebotomy should be feared in the case of colic pain, vomiting, and bloating, and all causes that diminish its virtue, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it's important to consider in the subtlety of humors before this if the illness is due to food and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for them.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And it's good to consider rest if there are any causes that don't allow it, or through some exercise so that the illness becomes subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And suspend phlebotomy on their feet in the morning, around the time of three o'clock, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And ensure that one's feet are protected from all kinds of animal accidents on that day of all illnesses and accidents, as well as anxiety, anger, fear, and any physical accidents, such as work and unnecessary stress or sex and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And according to their wish, make the causes be presented in the use of which they customarily follow among men for fragrance and aroma, like balms and similar things as per the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And have the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is at least as wide as the cushion of the person who will be undergoing phlebotomy.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And adjust their arm, and rub that with their hand the phlebotomizer two or three times; and tighten their belt at the corset and wrap that around them two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the constriction is adjusted, when the constriction does not equal it, or when the constriction is due to excess, then prohibit any flow of sickness; or when it's due to alleviation, then prohibit the body of the sickness altogether.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And during the constriction, it's to be known that the one who is about to undergo phlebotomy should rub their hands among them until the veins are swollen and this is declared through feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And as the phlebotomist uses their phlebotomy with a little of ancient olive oil; and then pauses their last touch on the back of their right hand over that vein, they determine the place where they want phlebotomy, so that the vein is slightly exposed, and percussion is stopped when it's from which veins you find this, as you must perform phlebotomy against them. And of those, they are filled with windiness and when you press the phlebotomist on that spot, they should be contracted by the phlebotomist, and then revealed by the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomist does not pierce the vein, and if they do, it is pulled.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, know that the phlebotomist must be firm and should be attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the phlebotomist; however, if the vein is punctured in one go, then yes; and otherwise, repeat this at another go over that spot, or with a bit of urgency on their behalf, if the spot isn't soiled.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is soiled, or if the stomach is upset, then let it rest for a day or two, and don't tighten the belt, lest he pulls pus from the wound, nor go into bed.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the phlebotomy if she desires it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the pulse is small and allows for subtle illness, and you fear that not enough of this sickness will be removed, then repeat the phlebotomy at that place according to rectitude and adjust in the pulse a little bit, and do this with urgency before the spot is soiled. When the spot is soiled in many people, you should have less pulse.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if you notice that it has already soiled, then do not repeat over them, for there is no excuse for any reason; and pause over that a part of the olive oil's opening, which soothes the body of the sickness.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it's better in this place that smell and the other smells are.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, in all phlebotomies where there are phlebotomes that should avoid the blood of diseases, they administer an oil cut in it, making a tincture with alcohol and salve when one is placed on that spot, where the disease is subtle and becomes agitated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, where drained spots occur, especially for those who have not bled but that spot, or at the point of the small vein, then you scrape it, and place your hand over the area with an infused sponge in water and salt, one that has been sliced, and strengthen it for an hour, when it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And know how to do this near the source of the blood flow from that vein towards its completion or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is some darkening or greenness in the spot for a few days, do not notice this; and if you wish, place on that something like aloes and myrrh dissolved, or something like mint juice or calamus or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And if draining spots occur with abscesses and swellings, you should perform phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that spot. If later you feel softness, maintain your compression on that area. Then, know that this swelling is bad and harmful. And then remember to place your hand on that spot with what we've discussed earlier, where it will drain from the blood artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster in the water where it is moistened, so that the place withstands, and then treat that with another treatment once it's healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And know how to extract from the blood at all for each person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the blood is black, then let it bleed until it becomes reddened; similarly, if you find it thick, let it bleed until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it's sharp, let the sharpness be contained within.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And know that for someone who is full and strong, needing blood extraction in a lesion, the phlebotomy of the vein should be expanded, and the phlebotomist should be skilled.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are weak, do the opposite of that. And know to extract that in drained spots, and have it done straightly.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing that is administered in venous phlebotomy is a cross section, not piercing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy prevents blood flow and nerve damage, and is more advantageous and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in this situation, where fainting is likely to occur, you should perform phlebotomy. And know that before phlebotomy, cure it with a small amount of infusion in vinegar or simple diluted oxymel; and extract blood from the body in three or four drained spots.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it's relieved by composition, then take before phlebotomy an infusion in balsam of myrrh or in scented honey water with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or in a scented and aromatic elixir.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs, you should perform phlebotomy. And it's because of the patient's blood flow that is disturbed by disease, then know to drink in water from meat and scented balsam with a subtle odor; and use aromatic remedies for their chest, and let his feet be near that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other reasons we've discussed in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if someone wants to empty their arm and dissolve their blood gradually in two stages, know that for this phlebotomy is through the means of evacuation, and the virtue of which is cool, it will drain the blood little by little, so according to the amount of its virtue on continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if someone wants to empty their arm and gradually drain their blood in two stages, and their body is strong, then do this about seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if someone wants to drain the blood of their body against the direction in which it tends, know that this should be done on the second day or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And if that body has a fevered blood that is sharp and causes it to become heated, know that you should drain it in one shot from your sanguineous substance, with a large quantity being drained and the point of entry should be expanded so as not to cause death due to fainting, for drained spots need this when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent; and place your hand on the pulse of that person concerning their blood stream, so it does not end in death instead of fainting, since drained spots require this when the one performing phlebotomy is unaware and careless.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not know when you want to loosen the arm and drain the blood in two stages, once the opening of the vein is closed and it becomes difficult to evacuate the blood, then press under that with forcefulness and slightly bend it outwardly, for this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let the blood drain until you complete phlebotomy again; or remain in this with the strength of the phlebotomist that has coagulated in the opening of the vein; or place your hand on it with tincture of myrrh, or salve, and apply a light compression until the blood is drained out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then smooth it out without touching it until the abscess is sedated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to provoke the release of the disease according to its symptoms, and not for excuse, then you apply that above that spot or on another arm at another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein referred to as "the arm's cord" is phlebotomized in the place of the small or the basilic vein, when they are not congested or hidden, which is made up of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the phlebotomy for the patient is that the patient dips their hand in hot water until the easy redness appears and the vein manifests itself clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And tighten it on that with a ligature or with a narrow constriction; and perform phlebotomy according to the transverse small one, not laterally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide and your phlebotomy at the location where you will perform the phlebotomy on the wrist joint, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the disease's symptoms is prohibited, then you dip your hand in hot water and let the symptoms run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	May you excuse if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from dipping your hand in hot water, and similarly restrain the body of the disease in hot water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The phlebotomy of this vein is particularly safe compared to all others, because for you there is no pulsating vein, nor a nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The phlebotomy of the wrist on the right hand corresponds to the diseases of pregnancy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the phlebotomy for you is to strengthen your hand with a ligature or with your own hand, as you have it laid in hot water, until the vein swells and is demonstrated visibly; then perform the transverse phlebotomy there; and if you incise that completely, do not let go of that one afterwards.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Remember to not finish your hand during the phlebotomy, because for you there are only the nerves of the fingers exposed without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then dip your hand in hot water and let the disease run through that; if you do not dip it in hot water, the disease will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and there will be no flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as you extract the disease according to the amount of need, then place a pause on the vein oil and salt so it does not solidify slightly; similarly ensure that you do this for all branches tightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Let the youth of the phlebotomy of that on the left hand correspond to the diseases of the belly.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do something similar for the phlebotomy of this as you did with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	Let the youth of the cephalic vein phlebotomy correspond to diseases that are in the right side of your body, such as pregnancy diseases and retention of menses, and diseases related to blisters and ulcerous conditions on thighs and old chest diseases, all corresponding to diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the phlebotomy for this is that the patient dips their palm in hot water and makes friction over it until veins appear; they place a string on the chest joint; and at the site where you see the prominent vein, you should mark that spot, and from there its branches spread out on the chest surface.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then perform phlebotomy on the larger branch or remove the lump wherever you find it necessary and suitable, which is better and more salt.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the chest surface, then you protect yourself from the nerves that are exposed there on the chest surface, and pause your phlebotomy at the location where you perform it transversely, as though you want to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if the phlebotomies are possible for you.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Let if the release of symptoms is prohibited; then you dip your hand in hot water and let the disease run through that until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist misses in the first attempt, then retry with the phlebotomy again in its vicinity, where the area is safe; and do not fear for your disease, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly perform on the other chest surface in equal manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	Regarding the sciatic vein, as we have said, it should be marked at the point where you find the groove of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The youth of this phlebotomy corresponds to the groin when it's due to disease heat.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient dips in a bath and quickly tightens their thigh muscle at the knuckle of the calf above the groove on four fingers along a long delicate bend; it does not appear like this otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy on that according to each method that is possible for you and transversely, which is better; or incise that by cutting or cut that by suction, where the area is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is in the thick parts of men, and if you find that one, but it doesn't appear to touch everything, then perform phlebotomy on some branch of it, and this is the one that appears behind the right side of the chest near the auricular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And protect yourself from nerves, let the flow of blood be as much as you want through the vein.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then relieve the constriction and place yourself on the site of the phlebotomy, strengthen that spot, so that it is slightly cured soon.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From suction and of those qualities to use them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Suctions are from corneas, or from iron, or from blood.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And suction is performed according to two ways: one of them is through incision and blood extraction, and the other is suction followed by incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this suction that follows incision does so in two ways, either with fire or with heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And among the suction treatments that are performed along with incisions and blood extraction, there are fourteen body sites. The first one is the navel, which is the last part of the head, where the suction is placed. The middle location is on each side of the chest cavity; and the ones by the throat divide into two parts of it. Suction treatments for the chin leave the jawbone but not the mouth; those for spatulae are given; those for the anus are located at the end of the rectum; those for the torches, they are two arms apart; those for the cavities are given; and those for the thighs each.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And suction does not remove the blood from the small, scattered veins in the flesh. Thus, it does not exert its force through those; like bleeding by phlebotomy; nor should suction be performed with fire or heat in any ailment caused by overfullness, until all of the body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Or if necessity calls for suction due to illness or continuous ailment, administer that treatment at all times in the middle of the month and at its end, as well as in the middle point of that period and any other time it may be needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is in those who have an excess of blood within their body when they require extraction through suction and find themselves with serious heat and swelling; and among them, they find overfullness and discomfort on their face and head, as well as in their chest; and among them, they experience pain around their head and forehead, and darkness and confusion in their eyesight; and among them, their snoring becomes excessive. And among those who are affected by the location of their suction treatment; and among them, their laughter is increased; and among those who find a taste for blood in their mouth, or whose tongue gets stained and discharges blood; and among those whose sleep becomes excessive, and among those who feel pain from blood during sleep, as well as other symptoms that resemble theirs.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when it occurs in any of those causes, especially if it is during the third or middle part of the month, then commanding suction to be performed as soon as possible after dawn, for at least three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the purpose of neck suction is that when it takes on heaviness in the head and where it settles in the cheeks; but note that this involves the evacuation of all over the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this suction is done at the site of phlebotomy for the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it's not mentioned to use that which comes from overfullness or in the one where there is catarrh, for it causes great harm to those.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And thus, it's not advisable to use that on the elderly or with heads where there are illnesses due to fever.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And for those who continue to work on that continuously over it causes forgetfulness; thus, you should command the suction operator to place their hand slightly under the suction device at each location, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And alcohol suction is at the site of phlebotomy for the dark vein and basilica: hence it causes asthma, constriction in the lungs, and the splitting of the lung's tissue, as well as coughing and overfullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it's important that the alcohol suction be slightly covered; if left exposed, it causes weakening in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the suction with aloe causes accidental pain in the head and ophthalmia, migraines, fever, and toothaches; it is performed at the site of phlebotomy for the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it's wise to command the suction operator not to press their hand too much during incision, so as not to cut into an artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And suction of the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and decay of the gum, as well as symptoms that resemble oral illnesses, and are found at the site of phlebotomy for allican which is located on both cheeks.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the suction that is performed over the two spoons causes coldness, which occurs due to excessive warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the suction that takes place within two thirds of the torches causes youthfulness in phlebotomy of three veins, they are basilica, dark and cephalic. This one draws blood from all those scattered veins throughout the body, as well as the small veins of other veins that lead to the drawing out of blood to these three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the suction operator not to proceed with incision, where the area is exposed of flesh, leave his nerves and arteries alone.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it's one suction over the buttocks that causes hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers if left untreated.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command the suction operator to create a strong suction, and use iron tools; where the area needs strength, let the soft, subtle pull of suction be performed repeatedly, and apply it with a scalpel during the scraping process.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Suction over the joints decreases by a clear manifestation, which pulls out the disease from the whole body and confirms old pains in the lungs and liver, and in the bladder; it initiates menstruation, confirming discomfort in the bowels and around; and stands where bloodletting is done for two syphilitic conditions, at cauterization, and for two types of pimple.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, motion weakens the whole body and causes fainting in middle-aged men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the suction at cauterization, youth is attracted to youth in the suction over the two joints.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the suction points is that you place the suction at the beginning view and continue with a warm breath, do not prolong the position of the suction points, rather pause those briefly, leave them gently, and let the fluids move to the location evenly for an even occurrence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the sign of the disease appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scrape and gradually increase the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	That person who has rare flesh prone to ulcers, you should scrape once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the suction operator to expand the scraping and only do a little more, always facilitating the suction.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the disease there is thickening, you should know that you need to scrape twice, where in the first scraping you open the path of subtle elimination to the disease and to his aqueous content.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And for the second one, at the scrutiny, acquire knowledge about the extraction of thickened disease matter.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the disease is dense and feculent, then it should be done with scraping for the third time so that it reaches the end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gradually, when we wish to extract a little at a time or even just a small amount of pus, suffice with one scraping.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to extract pus that is fluid, scrape with a scraping technique; and if we know that the pus is thick, you should know that you need to scrape through wave-like scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the end of scraping where it's only about reaching the depth of the disease up to this point.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the disease is thick, hard, dark, and their veins are strained, you should know that the suction areas be greasy softer, more open, more resolved; in summer times, as with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of lemon leaves, or oil from the juniper berries; and if it's winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lime, or oil of chamomile, or oil of the disease, and add those together.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and large, then use oil of wormwood, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of nutmeg, and add those together.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the suction operator has large and tender flesh pores, you should know that oil is forbidden for him, and you should add to these areas of the suction points with warm water or with hot water from solatrum leaves, or with water from juniper, or with water from bay leaves, and those added together.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for that where the pus is of liquid consistency, wash his suction points with vinegar or with water from myrtle and sumac, and add those together.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those where the excesses are thick, wash his suction points with vinegar old, or with water from saussurea, which is tarragon, or from decoction of nutmeg, or from chamomile, and add those together.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And you should know that bathing should be done before suction; it's also known that an hour or two after the bath, or by suction immediately afterwards, one should rest.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary for regulating the blood-sucking instrument before suction?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And when you consider at the beginning: if the suction operator or the one due for bloodletting is hot and full of pain and inflammation, then it should be given cooling remedies, such as sorrel, and endive with vinegar and lettuce water, and senna tea, and julep, and those similar.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them foods such as poultry, meats of roasted rabbits, and cooked vegetables with herbs, and those similar.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose complexion is pale, it should be recommended to drink almond milk or almond seed alecane tea with sumac, and fragrant wine between old and new; and that it's advised for them to use little drinking and eating, and pause the foods of poultry, cannabis, parsley, small rabbits and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it should be known that on the day of suction and bloodletting, his water intake should exceed his food consumption.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be known that in a few hours before some people with tyriaca alfarac, or muscle medicines, such as muscated, or alumina before suction or bloodletting or nearby, so that the main members are comforted and the disease is softened; do not recommend taking those scrapes.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The fanning out of those that are cuts due to scarification should be cuts over the belly, and on gout, and on the navel, in the places of joints, and on the waistband, for these members do not suffer from scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	It is not sought by those cuts but rather by the pain from the member's veins, like suction on nipples in gynecological disease due to blood flow of the veins of the arms; we use that for dissolving excess moisture inhibiting circulation in limbs, like suction on stomach and navel; for that causes contraction of the limb and shakes him up, resolving that windiness pain.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it is applied to the cheeks when they swell up or inflate, for by virtue of strong suction, the person swells up and removes the inflation from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Likewise when it is applied to the belly and back, it resolves excess wind in those confined areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These suction treatments are administered with grease alone; some treatments are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some treatments are filled with hot water in gynecological diseases of the belly.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	That is why the suction should be filled and have a large amount of pus, either just hot water or water in which herbs suitable for the case are steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of suction treatment applied with heat: let the size of the opening be that of two fingers, according to which we have formed it; and the amount of the paste should be as much as a palm; and in its middle part, at the place that is in the circuit, the same size as the part, let it be small depending on how much enters one needle into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of elderberry or citrus fruits, large slices, lion's flesh and clean ones so that it does not move the member from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of the cross-section of elderberry or iron, where the candle is placed over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is that large suction treatment which we prescribed; and the little grease from that according to gynecological diseases and the condition of whom uses that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And suckers for children and those who are weak are different from those for young people and large cross-sections.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this suction treatment over a limb is that it extends the wax from wood fire in front of one small candle made of beeswax, and place that over the middle section of the cross-section in the middle part of the sucker, so that the fire should be ignited around the space to prevent burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be applied over the limb of the patient, and let them know about the one we said, within which when we have the suckers and they do not need to be kept as such that vaporizes on that part, then the suction treatment will dissolve right away.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And according to its nature, heat the wax, and repeat that if you need more of it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	When suction treatment is administered in gynecological pleuresy, with water, without any cross-section or part, and it should only be filled with water and placed on the limb alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this suction treatment; the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter CVII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Suction treatments are not administered in moist limbs but in those limbs where it is impossible to place suction cups, due to the smallness of those areas, like the buttocks and gums and similar; or in limb devoid of flesh, like that and their similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those if you have found blood-sucking suction cups that are in the hot waters used for purification.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them rest in hot water until they become accustomed, and ensure that no harmful causes occur inside those limbs; and proceed to evacuate the body through bloodletting and suction treatments; and rub the limb of gynecological disease until it turns red; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and follow the case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it's possible to use grease from that place with suction, it's better during adolescence.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and add hot water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood circulation of the body extends to the attachment of the suction cups, and this is what happens, then put a cloth dipped in cold water on it, and place that one over so that the excretion can be drained.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood increases, then sprinkle it with unrefined vitriol or saltpeter and similar things that cause coagulation, so that the blood will clot; or place the ashes of roasted fava beans on the spot, and let them rest until the fava beans stick to the spot, and the blood will clot.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And indeed, if necessary, repeat the use of suction cups when it's possible to replace those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood-sucking cups are forbidden for suspension, then rub the place with recent blood or leave a needle in those places where there is some bleeding; and let them rest, because when they feel any blood right away.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to clean them, grind a little bit of powdered aloes, or salt, or ashes on those, and clean them immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	So this begins the section for treatment: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter addresses essential methods in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that many doctors and common people, as well as those who for some time will neglect the works of the ancients or not read even a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scholars on earth is kept private; I have not forgotten to do so even after all these years; and I have included nothing here that I did not learn, but rather through the extensive reading of the works of the ancients and study into their understanding, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct yourself towards experimentation and study throughout your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter all of my science and the experiments that were carried out; thus, I will abbreviate this for you others and relieve myself from the occupation of description; and shorten this at the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate this at the end of explanation; and shape this towards various forms of disturbances that are administered there, as done through explanation, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from existing fractures of bones, of which preliminary descriptions are necessary before we begin recalling the limbs of fractures and various ones for each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us say in the preliminary part of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters that are understood by those who are to begin their art as they progress towards understanding the truth of those ones; these are you and those who are quick to learn or acquire this noble art along with others for you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And let it be known that when something happens to a fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, then you should consider starting with bloodletting or releasing it, or at any time, if there is no prohibition by any cause, such as vertigo, or to the thing that happens to be affected, or old age, or during intense heat, or of intense fever.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be content in food, eating herbs and venison of rabbits and crabs; and forbid large meats and fill with foods and all types of foods that fill the veins of sanx, within which you can ensure a scabbed boil, and if you do not fear the expulsion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first regime, which is customary for them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And let it be known when the broken bone begins to be restored, that the patient should consume nutritious foods of dense and heavy substance with viscosity, such as those made from wheat cooked in water, eggs, pulses, fish, stomachs of cows, haws, fresh meats, large viscous substances like these, and under this regime there is a mild coagulation of bone pus.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones harden when they are in young men and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue as they are and be consolidated according to their nature through drying of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they harden and continue according to their nature all the time through the drying of those limbs, and they continue and are consolidated which are from them at the end of childhood, such as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and allows for any cause similar to gluttony on a broken bone throughout the entire part, with a substance that adheres and strengthens it internally that becomes consolidated and solidifies over time, as during the start of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, within which you should not prohibit it from its works due to any cause.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to pause the foods of the patient, foods which have gravity, viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fractures according to the diversity of limbs.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs, a fracture in the skull bone is different from a fracture in the head bone; and a fracture in the leg bone is different from a fracture in the two bones; similarly, all other limbs are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will conclude with recalling all species of fractures, which are detailed in their chapter separately from each other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of self-discovery about fracture.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And they are diverse in the species of bone fracture within their divisions; one is made an arched fracture another that happens in its stars; and some are made fractures according to the length of the bone: these are fractures of its sagittae and asterisms, whether caused or not, as done when preparing to write, and this is a fracture with scratch and disruption on the head, and it is small crack fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every species there is its own disturbance in restoration according to which will come the recall of it separately in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thus is known a bone fracture: it's the curvature of it, and the sensation of its prominence and attachment to your hand when you press it.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no obvious twist in the place or it does not occur when you touch it with pressure on the bone during palpation and the patient does not experience significant pain, then it's not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It's possible that there is a twist or small crack, just feel with your hands where you suspect it and during compression of the whole body; rest on them with the medicines whose memory returns around at that moment which suit the place; and straighten through subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Know that when the place is arched and does not split into two or more parts without occurring in the body, just feel where you suspect it starts from your current hour to correct the condition that happened when something afflicts him.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if something afflicts him with heat, then smooth that area for a few days until the heat subsides; and then equalize that according to any method you have of elevation and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Know that the restoration and repositioning of him is as gentle as from the bone where it happens to occur in his body.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And strengthen that according to the memory that comes back about him.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If it's in the bone that's injured, then an extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, if it's the hand or the foot; or with your hands if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your position where you pause the member in a location equal according to its natural figure, while stretching the parts of the broken limb outward; then force yourself to make those additions return with ingenuity and according to any method that can be used in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself so that it does not occur upon the body of the patient due to your operation or injury, and force yourself according to your ability to apply one bone in accordance with its best forms next to the other.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And know that in that moment you effectively touch with your hands, and if you find any different cause here, correct that and equalize it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, just like many doctors experience heat or forceful contraction occurring due to their operation when they use rough techniques, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen with the operations of their rough methods.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect, adjust, perform and control the operation of that limb, with rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make them avoid making those actions that can cause pain when they are awake or during sleep, observe their changes and movements, know their endurance, observe all their activities according to your virtue, and wait until you see that the position of the limb is a position in which the pain can be guaranteed, the cause of which occurs whenever one feels pain or injury when it's in the disposition of the limb. Then understand that you should rearrange this in another position where they do not feel pain; and watch that the position of him there is straight and equal so that no twist will occur to the limb during restoration.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the broken limb is what I recommend; for you must know that limbs that are broken vary in their smallness and greatness, and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, like the arm and such, then know that the wrapping should be of soft, thin fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are large, like the thigh or chest, know that for those there should be a wrap of firm, hard material, so that the bandage connects with the large and strong limb from all sides in equal constriction, provided it does not cause any mark.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And start to continue your process of equalizing, gently pause at that point, over the place of that fracture with three bandages or four according to what the limb needs; and strengthen your hand a little on this.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And continue towards that to the upper part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen gradually so that you do not force your constriction at which you have strengthened the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And gradually extend the bandage on the place of the fracture, and soften the constriction little by little, while you take hold of a large part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with a bandage, and continue to move towards the bandages toward the outer part of the fracture; and your operation is in the constriction of the bandage and softening of that according to what we said in the first bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And pause between the bandages of a length or fabric where the twist of the fracture is equalized if there is a twist in it; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And pause on the other bandage, and properly equalize over these star-shaped bandages that were just made, if there is no swelling or heat in this place, then pause where is that heat and where the swelling occurs; leave that for a few days; then strengthen on that.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stars of the middle part be red, and made wisely; or they can be made from wood; or from palm leaves; and let each star have this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And yet know that the star placed on that fracture should be much thicker and slightly smaller than the other stars, and the length of the star according to how it reads in size and smallness for the limb; and then strengthen again above with another bandage as per your first constriction; and let yourself adjust decently according to what we said about constriction, so that your constriction is more at the place of the fracture, and the longer you extend from the fracture, the better the constriction.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And consider that the threads should grow in size and complexity during pregnancy, and be long; if the threads are large, as I have seen through an operation for a few times severing the cords of some on their length, this is a great mistake, when tying the constriction before equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve through constriction what you want, and do not consider that between these and these there are spans of a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient has been moved to the ends of the stumps close to the constriction in their sensitive areas, then place those stops of lion fur or woven wool between which does not cause injury to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some burns and fractures occur as an injury, and there's disruption in the chain, and I will recall this again according to uniqueness in that at the capital.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken members are sewn with stitches on the first day; the reason is that when the limb, if it's large, cannot have pauses over its stellae but around three or seven days or more, according to your confidence in the occurrence of an abscess cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the splinting on which the Ancients would restore, those who pause over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of splinting as abruptly restored from fracture repair, suitable for complex wounds and especially for women and children, which is about what does not accept heat or rub: this involves taking corn powder, it's the essence of flour that remains in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And consider it like this, rather than sifting that with hen's egg white, and make sure the preparation is neither thick nor subtle; then use that accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	The text translates to: "Another method for setting broken bones and dislocations and twists is through the prescription of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, rue, and myrrh, which are powdered and mixed together with a thousand grains each, all amounting to one dragon's weight. For myrrh and aloen add five dragons' worth; for almond oil add twenty dragons; mix these all finely with water or egg white if the patient is sensitive; then apply this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones slightly, giving strength to human limbs."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	The text translates to: "Another method of plastering that strengthens fractures and twists is made with myrrh, white sandalwood, frankincense, myrrh, and cinnamon amounting respectively to one dragon's weight for each ingredient."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	They are ground in a mortar on the patient's wound, they are sifted, and they are mixed with water or with hen's egg white, then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The method of splinting for joints and bones separated from their places, and the relief of pain in those and cracks and fractures: take waxed thread wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil of cod liver, then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster does not perform restoration magic, nor does it create an abscess cautery; it simply expels the pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and salvaged poppy seeds; mix all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A brief method of applying plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: prepare extracts from alum, from chamomile and violet flowers, from flour of ashes, in all parts .i.; They are all ground and mixed with vinegar, if the member is not sensitive.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it's sensitive, then mix that with wet clove water or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method for plastering that provides faster resolution than the first one when an abscess occurs during healing: prepare extracts from alum, from lime seeds, and borage leaves, as well as yellow yarrow, honey bees, basil, violet flowers, chamomile, all in parts of equal measure; they are all ground and mixed with water from cress or with two-fold water, or vinegar, depending on the quality of the member and the color of its rest.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Moses Hipocrates did not write in his free works that you should restore the injured limb using only wax and oil, and not any other substance; he recommended applying a mixture that is both thick and fine.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Moses Galien observes that when one should place something on the broken limb to restore it and the causes in which small heat quality is involved can also include myrrh, resins, and similar substances like those we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	The method for dressing injuries and easing pain: mix finely ground ashes of burnt human skin or hair, along with alum and another ingredient (likely a type of mineral or plant), in equal parts; sift them together and create powders; these are then used to make the dressing.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Moses considers the amount according to which inflammation spreads and if it's properly diminishing, you should assess whether there was no pain or bruising and the bone wasn't broken. If not, then don't disturb its natural healing process for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is intense pain or bruising or swelling at the site, then you should remove or displace it immediately, and apply that dressing to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen and a sponge that's wet with sea water, immerse those in hot water, then wash the affected area with them until the bruising stops and the pain subsides; afterwards let it rest for an hour. Then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or roasting oil, cover it with this overnight until you're sure of a boil forming, and to ensure that swelling goes down and to alleviate the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gently stretch that tightness and apply a small dressing, don't strain it with your initial stretching. Do this inside until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you notice that the boil and the heat and the pain and swelling along with all accidents have subsided completely, and you lack dressing and stretching, then continue doing this in the same way as you started equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if nothing of those causes happens to the limb, then don't disturb it, but after about three days or four or five; And some scalds of all this are left for twenty days according to how it appears through the easing of the limb, as we have said, during which the fracture adheres, and it comes to rest on the coagulation of the flesh over there.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the stretching more than your initial stretching completely, and adjust to the swelling of the patient's food, according to when it is confirmed that its restoration has occurred.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Moses if you notice the fracture site has dried and weakened more than it originally did, then you know that nutrition should not reach there; hence soak that area in hot water every day; do this for all three days; slightly relieve the stretching, and with this operation provide nutrition to the limb, and it gets restored slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Moses whatever the folks who restore fractures in limbs do differently than when it is restored to its original state, according to how it progresses and is restored according to its shape, is an error according to their operation, causing great fear. If they were just craftsmen they would have exaggerated the ancients' works in their free writings and improved upon that treatment process.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I haven't seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable to think they are not doing this.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	The second case: About fractures that occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are hits, and their appearances vary. The causes differ. Some fractures occur due to impact from space, where the force remains within the skull, leaving the bone intact, similar to what happens in a stick, hence this type is named "ascial". Or the space impacts only part of the bone, affecting the flesh without penetrating deeply into it; thus, this type of fracture is named absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the impact of these two types can be severe or minimal, and for fractures that cause pain due to friction or compression; and their causes are impact against stone or crushing on stone, similar to them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture either almost reaches the brain leaving the bone intact; or it occurs in the facial part of the bone. The impact of these two types can be severe or minimal.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for fractures that expand in the bone, in its slight thickness, like hair, thus this type of fracture is named 'capillary'.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is the fracture that occurs due to impact or crushing of stone and it is similar, causing some layer of bone to enter its parts inside. It happens in the concave area like when a hole is made in an ear by impact and part of their entry into the inside parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is mainly done this way in wet bones, such as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these species of fractures, they are separate like stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come back with a restoration of all this in its original place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these species of fractures through examination and inquiry about them, as well as testing the decayed flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known by this that it is discovered over the bone, which is cleansed and bounded around it, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's injuries, and then observe the symptoms that manifest as clear signs on them. Such signs may include vomiting due to colera, extension, loss of understanding, loss of speech, fainting, acute fever, sneezing fits, and fits of coughing, as well as similar symptoms in major conditions. It is advisable that they are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter non-fatal accidents, you expect healing; then you start the treatment for them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This is the reason that if it comes to you like being wounded during a journey just as one gets wounded and this happens in the days of winter, then conclude that you study in the bone's anatomy on the thirteenth day according to complete disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, then conclude that you take care or examine the bone before the seventh day; because what gets corrupted in the bone due to heat (pannicol) and accidents that have been recounted occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already been corrupted by heat (pannicol) reaching the brain, and it is divided into small parts with discoloration, then conclude that you should scrape and rub the affected part according to what I will instruct you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And when you examine the head of the wounded patient, and expose the bone according to custom and your ability as per the figure of the wound, make sure it is done lightly on the body.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you, you must detect the bone, pus, or abscess flow from a cautery burn, then you oppose him with what is necessary, and this when you smell the place of the soaked sheets in vinegar and rubbed oil. You make sure that the abscess has settled down; and indeed, you start within the circumference of the bone and its removal process.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two surgical operation methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you make an incision in the bone with a straight cut instrument. This is how it should be done: Then you administer another cutting tool slightly above this one. This is how it should be done:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more of the cut instrument further down than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And know that you need to name various cut instruments, among which some are longer than others; and some of them have shorter cuts compared to others, and they should reach the tip's extremity in terms of sharpness. They should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in striking against the cutting instruments, so that you do not crush its head and damage it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then conclude that you should pierce through its circumference before administering the cutting instruments at their grooves; which are named as non-deep grooves.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named otherwise than those that do not reach the edge of the bone, up to which it is near them; whereby when the groove has its rounded end or margin over that which leaves the sharp head of it resembling a margin or small circle, this must not be submerged and should not pass through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient for you to take many of these grooves among which each adapts to the thickness of each bone, as long as they are present in all bones of the head where the end of them is sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three kinds of grooves: The quality of piercing in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the groove on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated; then, move the groove to another location, and ensure that throughout the process, you have taken the quantity of its thickness or around this.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you make an incision with the cutting instruments among any piece of bone you've extracted, making it as subtle as possible at the end of its flexibility, just like we have said, while removing or scraping the bone, or on your hand, or by some other means using tools you will be equipped with for this purpose, such as tongs and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And know that you must exercise utmost caution so that the cutting instrument does not touch any sensitive part of the mouth.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have pierced the bone and separated it from the mouth if this continues with it, and you extract it, know that examine and compare it to the roughness of what is in the bone by another tool resembling a cutting instrument but instead, ensure that it is more precise and more subtle than other cutting tools.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there remains any part of the petticoats or stockings, then take that with ease using the tools you should use for these purposes; and then treat the wound with cleanliness and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is light and distant from the body, which was described by Gualia and Lauzec through great authority; this is what it means: It's necessary for you in the beginning that you start discovering the part of the bone on the location where the fracture is most violent and most evident. Once you have discovered that part, place your hand at the end of this cutting tool gently and quickly as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the round partition is lion and does not accommodate any cause, and the sharp partition is from him in two latitudes before in length, as; so that the round partition should be adjusted to the ciphac at his face meeting the acute one inside the bones.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then hit about the incision of one partition in a small hole inside where it has penetrated all the bones in such a way as it has turned, and you should be sure of the technique that does not lead to your fear of an accident in any manner; indeed, if the doctor was the pus of all people and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if he finds any connected cause to the bone of the technique in some places of bones, that one will penetrate that from him at the end of the round incision, and relieve that from him easily, which is relieved from his hurt and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate inside the technique, and whatever is attached or remaining from the bones is the face of him, and it remains in him with roughness and subtle secrets, then carve that roughness and eliminate those secrets through sharpness using the number you have prepared, with various quantities so that it's possible for you to administer these in all places the most suitable pus of them and the right pus from those according to where you lose your operation on this broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And carve to administer in your ratio at which you sharpen the bones from the beginning of the thick pus, and then use the subtle pus of it closely, and do not cease doing this until you reach administering the thick pus and the subtle pus of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May in any of the other minor and small fractures or subtle fracture, carve to administer care according to what you lost on correcting it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is because it does not please on all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And stand on what we have written, showing large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the technique is twisted when you remove the bone, then carve that you take cloth according to the size of the injury, and immerse it in a well-oiled substance, and place it over the wound; and also take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in water and well-oiled substance, and place it on top of the first cloth; and carry out this procedure with a small amount of pus so that you do not hurt the ribs; and then apply a thin layer of fat over it, and do not press it except by the size of the injury only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it under this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the pus blister; then remove it and apply medicine with which excessive drying is unnecessary, such as flaxseed and flour of eggs, and powder of ashes and aristolochia, and powders of those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make these medicines into powder that is ground over the injury, such as dry ones; universally, apply all medicine of property which repels and do not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep according to your virtue that the injury in your treatment should be clean; and it should not be in the softness of ointment or any other thing; nor let you add toxicity to it; for when it is adjusted on the technique of the brain, corrupts that and poisons those, and spreads malign malice over the body near this evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skull, as from him are changed the bones and especially when you neglect the treatment of him, and there is a blackness on the surface of him; and therefore consider now if any accidents happen to the body that we have said, know that they are harmful to all.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackness happens but only from the medicine that is placed on top, and it's due to the medicine that causes this blackness, then carve that you take a part of honey and parts of well-oiled substance .iii,. And apply these lines with a cloth, and then place that on the skull; and then treat it with the remedies of healing that suit you until it's healed.
Capitol .iii.	Third chapter.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken only from one part but two parts are usually separated on top, or one of those few broken ones, because in him there are two bones, which the separation from these is cartilaginous and not broken; it does not affect him but rather inflammation and tightness and congestion.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	And if one of the two parts of him is broken, then carve that you introduce your little finger into his nose, and equalize that fracture internally according to your little finger indicator, and outside your little finger position; so that the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for you with ease, and watch over yourself that it doesn't fall from your operation onto the body as a whole.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the bone of the nose, and your finger doesn't reach that, then carve that it should be placed at the end of the ray where there's slight swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make this likeness.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And take care of the restoration of him on the first day of the fracture, if it's possible; otherwise, then around seven or eight days you should rest from the pus blister.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert a piece of cloth at the extremity of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two clamps, if the fracture is in two parts, and make the clamp size fill as much as fills the nasal passage.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And among the ancient restorers, let the clamps be encased in plaster and be left for an entire day, yet I do not follow this practice; instead, have it known that the clamp should be enclosed in duck white as a powder and mixed with bone ash. Then smooth out so that the bone is set and hardened by the cartilage.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes, when a pus pocket is found in the nose instead of a clamp, it could lead to an accumulation that wraps around like duckskin; and indeed, if there is already a broken nose pus, the patient should not be prevented from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do it like this, and if you wish, use clamps.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another pus pocket occurs on the nose, treat it by covering the nose with a paste of turpentine or one that is made from fat and oil that has been rubbed, or with vinegar.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if you do not experience a pus pocket, then treat the area outside with corn flour and ground cinnamon, and mix with duck white powder; then place a cloth over it instead of any cause, and do not pinch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if there are broken bones in the nose due to a small fracture or they are not treated, then treat it by spreading over those areas, and remove them with tools that suit those; then apply around the cut, and heal that with what heals and consolidates, and apply plaster suitable for that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an internal wound occurs in the nose, then treat that with clamps and administer lead pipes into it until it is fully healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone that you have left is broken and the fracture of it is not enclosed in pus, examine if the fracture is only on the outside, and it is not cracked into two parts but bent towards the inside, then its consideration is light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And when you are doing this, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the right jawbone, then insert your other hand's right index. Then push out the internal tension of the fracture towards the outside with ease for both parts, with your other hand from the outer part of the bone; do this properly equally there as well.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jawbone has already been separated into two, then treat by applying extension to both parts according to rightness as long as it is possible for its equilibrium.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is movement of teeth in disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break into gold or silver or copper; and place a stop on the broken jawbone with plaster, and another cloth on top of this, and another large star-like patch properly made, or one piece of only equal to the length of the jawbone; and apply it according to what suits your ability, while ensuring it does not destroy.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and abstain from drinking with his lion's cuisine.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that it has been altered in any way, then you take care and relax that on the third day; and properly correct what is already altered from you and plaster that with bone ash, with duck white powder, or with corn flour, for you will have finished all the plaster of your patient, and place a lion's wool over this plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And once this is done and the plaster has been placed over it, and if the position of the bone remains unchanged, leave it alone, do not disturb it until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for this particular fracture will be fully healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another pus pocket occurs in the treatment area, then administer what we have described for treating a healed pus pocket until it heals, and make sure to remove that pus pocket.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by pus, then consider whether it is a bone fragment detached or not, in which case you refine that fragment with what suits your skill for removing those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound openings are stretched, then you enlarge them with a suction syringe according to your need's quantity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finished removing those fragments, and if that pus pocket is not enlarged after removal, then treat the wound opening as it is wide; otherwise, place one of the plasters suitable for this on top of that, while waiting until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On restoration of the hyoid bone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Widened views show that the hyoid bone is broken behind the front part of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without fragments; and this is easier for its restoration; or indeed there are fragments in you, making the restoration difficult; or also if the fracture is accompanied by pus.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And in that operation, when the fracture is at its worst, you must have two ministers present, so one holds the assistant and follows the broken beam, and the other extends the back part of the head towards that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then adjust the fracture with your hands inside where the shape of the thing has been formed, so it is neither in a small lump nor a depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then dig into the fatty part of the patient's buttocks with your fingers, using a piece of cloth or wool; its size should match your need in quantity; and extend and elevate the beam while holding the lump with your hand so that you adjust the fracture according to what is formed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the beam outward to the sides, as it is confined within the body, then dig in such that the buttocks are folded over the neck, and place your hand on the muscle at the hip about midway, with pressure.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses on the muscle at the sides where you place your hands, so that the bones of the beam are elevated as they would be in front, and then you correct the fracture and adjust it with your own hands.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel stiffness in the beam and it's painful, then dig as if you are splitting that area and remove those stiffnesses with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you make an incision into it with one of your surgical knives which you have prepared for this task, as you have placed the beam firmly against the stent that serves the crotch; and this stent is made of wood or iron whose shape is like this:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It resembles a knife with this curvature; and its width depends on how much you need from it, according to the size of the bone or lump.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it depends on what is feasible during the operation; let there be two ends like this time, and one end should be broad while the other one should be narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the breakdown of the wound you have incised when removing the stiffness from the bone is wide, and you are certain of a pus pocket, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the breakdown is small, or you fear a pus pocket, then use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the cut in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you happen to get a pus pocket, then apply cloth soaked with vinegar and oil rubbed onto it, and place your hand over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The narrowing of the bone when it is a wound and its section, you should place plaster made from flour of mill and egg white, then place your hand on lion's skin, and apply it over that; if needed further, take water, so wet it with what Saracens use, which should be long-lasting, and have thickness like a palm or around there; then apply powders twice on the bandage and plaster. And take a thin table stick whose width is about three fingers in length similarly; then wrap that around cloth, and then encase that cloth around the stick to cover the location of the fracture; and place water similarly as if it was being poured out, and roll that over the head of the patient and let your hand touch it softly, and let your hand touch the fatty part of the buttocks, then press that on all sides, and whenever there is narrowing in the fracture and it has a descending narrowing, so that this should not be concealed under you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And in general, when the stick does not hurt the broken bone; and as you should see the buttocks every day, that when the ligament is softened or you already see the stick becoming hardened again, then you correct this and strengthen the healing.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's buttocks on their head, and place your hand on the fatty part of them to have their buttocks touching their neck at night with a small cushion; so that under this one holds the assistant of the patient in the back region of it, and therefore elevates the fracture up to its elevation point of the beam; or let their arms lie on the back of this.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not soften the ligament if it does not occur suddenly or pus appears within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster when you have seen its appearance at that point, adjust in the narrowing and restore it and let it be smooth until the beam fracture is restored and has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some people take additional times of this duration.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Regarding the restoration of shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	Spatula tart has been broken at its back part and not at itself but only on the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the location of it is broken - and it's broken in the middle part of it - and only known by touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture force you prepare for it and reduce that according to the natural figure everywhere using any tool which is feasible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the location flour of mill with egg white and lion's skin; and then place double cloth powder; and then place over it a thin table stick according to the size of the spatula or slightly more than that.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If you leave the blade curved in one of the spots on the spatula surface, then you round that curvature with a round stone, and proceed to adjust the blade according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And reinforce it above with human saliva against constriction, and adjust the blade inside so that it does not slip from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament in every day; and all times when it is softened, apply another time and strengthen it and adjust the blade if it slips from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And leave the patient lying on their back there.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored within xx days or in .xxv (which seems to be a typo and might be intended as xx).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you should know securely that that comes from the bones where it began not to be feared or its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the bone of the heel and place yourself below the tendon, then cut over them, hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the sternal notch for pus in a boil if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks at the middle point of it, and there is a sharp pain; but its ends should not be broken or pulverized.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of its accidents when it breaks in the middle of it, it declines towards the parts inside and happens to it great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and nausea; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that you place the patient's leg over their foot, and place a cushion under their shoulders; then press on their muscles, adjust their back against the two ribs, and refine your technique in the operation and according to all methods as possible and suitable for this, so that when they return the shape of the bone according to its context.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and cover it, hold it above a thin table of wax or pitch and in the airiness, because you wrap that with cloth; and refine this upon the broken bone so that it does not stick; and follow the swelling according to its roundness on some days, strengthen that with normal constriction; and then consider the swelling throughout time, and when it is softened strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes the breakdown or pressure, or pain, or pus that happens in this area, then you remove and release it and eliminate the ointment, correct what happens through this method of treatment; and then reduce the ointment, if you notice something about this face; and adjust to its constriction so that it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of the ribs only occurs in large areas that cover both; and from their ends on the front part, they do not come into contact with those due to them being cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the awareness of it is not hidden from feeling you should inquire about it through touch.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be like this: you align the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, so that it is aligned according to its context, and then apply the ointment and strengthen the broken bones with a blade, if you need that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines towards the parts inside, then it causes great pain and punctures, just like a puncture that happens when someone has suffocated, for this reason because the bone puts on the skin; it also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of motion sickness; and this is hard to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Greeks were skilled in that with movements like these.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them we say: care for that by placing foods of the abdomen which cause inflammation and wind, so that the belly is inflated and stretched outwards, and the fracture is driven towards the parts outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Let's avoid causing that through this way which would hardly generate pus in the cautery, if it doesn't happen; and if it already happens, then help with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say some that it is placed against windedness and close to squeezing with strength; it's similar to reasoning, yet however, the windiness is thought to throw away excesses due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say some: that the area be covered with wool already immersed in cautery oil, and lay powders between the ribs until full, making it swell as you wrap it according to roundness; then heal the abdomen with the treatment of food distress and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the constant constriction of the abdomen that doesn't tolerate it causes pain in the skin due to tooth marks, we fear for the abdomen, then you should cut over the area, uncover from the broken rib, and then place an instrument below which preserves the cipher, as its predecessor is memory, and I will engrave the bone with ease, and remove it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And refine the two lips of the wound if it is large with stitching, and heal that with ointment until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then you cut and fill with powder in oil rubbed, placing it over the area, and heal the patient by letting what comes out from within cure the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And place them on their side over the stomach where they sleep, until they are healed.
Capitol .ix.	Capítulo IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Chapter 9: On restoring fracture of the second and third cervical vertebrae.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some dislocations require fractures in the bones of the neck, and damage to their ligaments, similarly with the thoracic vertebrae.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such a situation arises with another and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: If their hands are already softened, numb, dead, cannot move them anymore, cannot stretch or strengthen them, and when you press those areas or prick them with needles without feeling pain, then understand that they are not healing and in such cases it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if squeezing those areas or pricking them with needles causes constriction in the words and pain, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover from the treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see something similar to this in the thoracic vertebrae and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And when you find that they are already softened, it is similar to what happens in the hands. If their feet get numbness and loss of appetite as per their will, then some cases require them to be on their back and urinate, but cannot do so. In such cases, know that it is fatal, and therefore do not proceed with their treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no cause for those things does occur, the cause is better and more mild.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is to perform desinfection on the cauterized abscess that you place oil rubbed over the dislocated cervical ligament, or with hot embers; place it there for some days until the cauterized abscess is desensitized.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the bandages comforting and present, strengthen over that with liniment; and instruct the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the part where they find pain until they recover.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the ligament of the neck is torn or any reason causing separation from them, then heal what opens on the seam and remove that bone; and properly align the two edges of the wound, with suture if it's large; and treat that with some cooked meat substance until they recover.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the lower part of the spine is broken and it's at the tip of the coccyx, then heal by inserting your right hand's middle finger into the anus, and aligning the broken bone with your other hand according to possible second-order equation; and then place a plaster and ash over them, if you need those, and strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel torn ligaments in them, then apply over that, stay there, and treat the wound according to the treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On restoring spinal curvature.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the spine are broken; if they break, then the fracture is merely communication in the extremities of those and are implanted along their length; and it happens to the patient pain at the location and pricking sensation when there's a fracture. The change is numbness when it's a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over them until it is on top of the fracture which is the figure of them.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of them, then you align that according to what suits you by equal equation until it's assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the long or already declines towards your parts, then you make the patient lie on their abdomen until you prepare for restoring that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have aligned that, place a plaster over them, and then place an ash of wood or seam over that. Strengthen with bandage on which don't fear the puncturing of fracture nor moving of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the curvature with that which fills that until that accepts the bandage according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an abscess cauterization occurs, then you cease the extension and restoration of them until that abscess cauterization is desensitized. Place there what sedates that according to what proceeds; and then return to their restoration and strengthen it accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they occur in the ligaments or are fragmented, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On restoring fracture of the auxiliary (possible referring to a specific bone or structure in the body).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The auxiliary is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of them can be done in one of two ways, which you take with wood half-thick according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if they are in two extremities of two ligaments, then it should be suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And have the patient lie on their side; and then straighten out the broken arm and place it inside a bundle so that it reaches the nipple's position in the middle of which the curvature of the bundle is connected.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And hang over that some heavy cause, or the physician extends it to the parts left; and then the doctor waits for the fracture on his hands, as the fracture returns according to how it covers.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is for the patient to be curled on their back and raise their hand from the neck; and order one of the doctors to have them hold this place where the fracture is above his hands; and the other holds the rest of the body. And each of them extends to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you press on the fracture firmly and also press on that area, and each of the two doctors extends their arms to both of their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover half of the bundle over the nipple and the other half you should place on the side of the fracture.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the corner, then cover it with the bundle over that place and over that corner.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Gently perform this and complete the task, then approximately when it is evenly matched according to how it fits and is applied properly, then strengthen that without causing a blister from the cautery.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If a blister does occur from the cautery, then loosen the constriction by the seventh day, and place woolen thread over it with an ointment in abundance inside, as it rests the blister, and then you should strengthen that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen that is to place a plaster over the fracture, then cover it with a cloth wrap; and adjust the hand over that support, and place your open hand on their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen over that support with your hand so that the arm is in the position of stars, otherwise you will prevent any cause from that broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that is to place over the fracture that star which is more accurate and stronger than the others; and between each star place the width of the same, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage be added by three digits from every part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the stars with that constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the title.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that is for your constriction about the place of the fracture to be more tightened.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when it is stretched out further, the constriction should be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you note the position of the stars and the constriction as we have said when restoring the limb to its original position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a blister from the cautery, then loosen the constriction and the stars for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bundle in all parts for three days so that it does not occur at the place of pressure or swelling; or prevent food from reaching the limb by the disposition of excess constriction; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	And if you are concerned that no cause occurs from this, then do not release the ligature but consider three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's back be on their two legs, and their hands are on the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the support a full meal of wool, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not broken nor dissolved in the figure of the broken limb, or that the bundle has been softened; therefore correct this entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And serve the food of the patient according to the order which we have before mentioned, so that the food is subtle at first until strengthening begins; and then notice when you thicken the food for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	That which is customary of the support and of their chest is that they be strengthened in forty days; and then notice when they are released and are given baths and are treated with ointments, which correct those.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is laid out rubbed, then do not release that bundle and stars for one day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is made of two bones which are called the forearms; of which one is small and it is the one that holds the term 'palm', while the other is large and it is placed over the small one from below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And a slight break affects only the larger forearm, or the smaller one, and they both bend at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when it is broken above the smaller one, then its restoration is slight, and its healing is even more slight.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it is broken from below the smaller one, then its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	And so if the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm above, then it is convenient for the doctor, you should restore this, that allow a small extension in ease until that is matched.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if it is the larger forearm that is bent, then you should notice an extension more vigorously.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both the kidneys are simultaneously inflamed, then you should vigorously press on the extraction point filled with pus.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you should place your hand in the shape of a restored patient's body and stretch their limbs on a cushion, and have the wrist of your hand touching various parts below them; besides everything else said, let the auricular command be as low as possible among all others, and the patient shall lie on their back on an inclined cot.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of them at the height or alignment of their body, so that the patient does not move unnecessarily.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And nearby, have one minister extend their arm from the affected area to their own hand or similarly on their other side, and another minister will extend over in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And nearby, the doctor should match the bones inside to realign that according to the best figure possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the bone's structure there are distortions, then you should thoroughly reduce all parts to their place with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if you find separate distortions that cause hindrance and are not within your hope for restoring the patient's health, then you should operate on them and proceed as we have instructed above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	And if the fracture is due to an injury, I have already addressed this unique case, and thus proceed with treating that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if it happens that you encounter an abscess while beginning your restoration, then apply a cloth saturated with roasting oil and white wax, alternating between coarseness and fineness. Tighten the cloth over the area inside which the abscess is being softened; then remove the bandage and apply a plaster prepared from powdered moli in the clay of oil, and place stars; let this star be placed directly above that fracture with care and strength.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of stars on the arm is seen in the major arrangements, or for a kidney (fracture) in one or simultaneously in two kidneys.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And nearby, place your grip firmly over the spot of the fracture as strongly as possible. When the tightening can be more pronounced on the limbs above or below the fracture, or even lower parts of them, place your grip a little wet after initiating treatment in the beginning of this treatise.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that cover the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough. The paste applied on which strength is built should be of your own proper middle between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the joint for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises that requires correction, as what usually happens to the limb, then consider when you immerse the limb in cold water until that inflammation subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be strained until it rests, and then return your grip.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the tightening has already softened and the bone has returned to its original state, then correct everything with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess tightening; then consider when you should gently soften that and leave it for a few days until its nutrition begins again, and then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if nothing of those causes that we have discussed happens to the back (patient), then do not let it be discharged within approximately twenty days or roughly around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And nearby, have the back (patient) hold their hand up by virtue of vigorous movements, and let them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or forty days, or somewhat stronger in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the composition of parts and the virtues' dispositions.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii. (This is most likely indicating the thirteenth chapter or section.)
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of restoration of fracture in the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the wrist and the joints of the fingers there can be fractures, but they do not occur directly to them, only sprains are common.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a fracture or sprain in the wrist, then consider that the patient should lie down with their back facing up and in line below them according to equality, and place your hand over that which is extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And nearby, have the minister extend the broken bones, and the doctor should match those back together as they fit well into each other.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then consider when you apply plaster and wadding if there is no abscess formation. And nearby place stars according to the size of the area; you have already wrapped that in a cloth of your own.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the cracking is in the inner parts under the palm's belly, then make a semblance of a cloth bed, and command the patient to strengthen that on their cracked palm; nearby have it strengthened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the star of the heart be on a cloth bed where it is raised, so that the heart is applied to the palm; strengthen that according to what you consider.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is on the outer parts, then consider when you place stars and another star of the part left in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; nearby place your grip as the hand turns like a mouse between the fingers in an intimate manner.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then when it's your hand, match that according to what you consider and nearby have it strengthened on the palm; optionally place your small finger straight for lifting the fracture up without damaging it.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other ditz, such as at the waist or backside location, or at the chest, or in the ear or ring bone, then it should be treated equally and in a manner that suits each; or if they pause over that small peak, similarly to what we have said about gout.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and nearby that area, the position of applying a cautery burn and opposing it - in relation to your operation - according to what protects against any cause of those conditions as detailed in the subsequent narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fractures of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone, when broken, is felt by the sensation as it turns to the front part and to the superadded pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of the patient is done so that the ligaments are strengthened over the fracture and other ligaments remain around it. The sufferer should lie on their belly and face up.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the minister should extend all the ligaments to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is close to the axis of the thigh bone, then make the ligament close to the knee at the part of the patella, so that the extension fits them, and the other ligaments remain around the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is close to the knee, then make the ligament close to it, and let the extension be at the remaining parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor equalizes the bone between his two hands so that it is reduced according to its natural form; and if the bones are joined by good connection; then cover with plastering and bandaging, unless a boil occurs in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	And if a boil occurs in him, then leave it for some days until the boil caneserises and drain; then proceed with your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging of the patient is done like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap around the joint until it reaches the axis of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the thigh and the area near the knee on the remaining parts, with its ends reaching from the inner part of the joint to the outer side of the two parts; then roll it around the joint and thigh until excess of the bandage is superfluous.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place star points on the thigh at that fracture location, and place another point under the bone of the joint with a star.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the spaces between the joint and thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandaging is able to clot.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin with strong bandaging in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, your bandaging should be smaller and lighter and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend both ends of the needle to the remaining parts until it reaches into the chest cavity, strengthen both ends of the stars from the other side so that the ligaments do not move from their location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And let the bandage lie on that area so that no harm befalls the limb to a corrosion or cautery boil or swelling, resembling those; and if any cause of these occurs, then treat it with rest for the patient, and adjust accordingly as we have discussed broken bones.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	And if in the bone there is a hollow part to which you can place something, then make sure that you equalize it according to what is possible for you; and if not, apply treatment on him and keep the rest of the treatment until he is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some times this thigh bone fracture is strengthened with the rest of the treatment that is adjusted to his stars, as we have mentioned in the assistant and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the patient in this manner, no limpness occurs on the body; and if it is restored alone, then for another reason that the other joint receives treatment, then it becomes necessary that he limps from which he has been in contact.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh bone is strengthened in ten days or a few months or a few months, and all this varies according to the diversity of conditions and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the knee cap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that breakage of the knee cap is rare and it usually happens to broken bones accidentally.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if it occurs to him fracture, then it is simply a crack or injury in its parts, and on this whole thing is established according to the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of him is done so that it is equalized what breaks from his parts among those, added and connected according to what is possible by balance and convenience and manufacture.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply plastering and place a round star on him if you need that one; and strengthen above with bandaging as is suitable.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as applying a cautery burn and similarly to those so that you oppose all accidents to what is suitable for him until he is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Regarding the restoration of the thigh bone fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that there are two bones in the thigh, one of which is thick and it is named as the thigh bone; the other is delicate, and it is called the femur.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And for the types of fracture affecting both bones of the arm, it occurs in a similar way to what happens when the two bones of the arm are affected, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same manner as the restoration of the arm, and the operation on it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if there are three bones affected at once, the thigh becomes damaged in all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if it is broken inside the delicate bone, the thigh is damaged ahead of its parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if it's broken in the thick bone, look for that cause, and those are reasons not under your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and adjustment of the tendons according to that manner.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, when the thigh bone fracture is free of solid particles, let the extension be gentle and more mild, and rejoice with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the thigh, there is an operation on the arm, which occurs when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation. In this case, you take weights of wood from under you which are placed to prevent the causes that are taken off by walking, and they are formed by branches of palm trees; remove those where there's a slight pain, avoiding any damage to the hands, and have their length according to the length of the thigh, and bring them into the middle when you place them under.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop over each cloth in two layers according to the length of it, place one over the section of the thigh bone from one side and the other from the other side, and have them near inside the middle at the location of the chest.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two tendons at three points of each extremity and in the middle point. With this structure, the thigh is prevented from moving to the right or left side, staying in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already, administer a bundle of wood according to the length of the thigh; and let the thigh be placed in such a way that it retains this of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mainly know when you must do this for a fracture, and when that is properly treated.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the thigh in each day and study it thoroughly from behind onward, and keep it away from pus or swelling or other similar causes; and when any cause of those occurs, pause your treatment until such time that it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Moving on to the next sentence for translation:
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Regarding the fracture of the heel bone and the bones of the foot and fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	As for the heel bone, fracture does not occur in entirety; but fractures do happen to the foot bones on some occasions. And as for the fingers of the hand, fractures do occur occasionally too, but they do not happen randomly, only during certain months.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And when fractures occur to the foot bones and those bones tend to rise above each other, then the patient lies down on their prepared bed with their foot on the ground in such a way that they can proceed.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which rises above those bones, and also press down on them, and level them within the places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply plaster and bind it above, and place some on the belly of the hand too, using two cushions as a small table.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that with the hand at the correct position downwards; because you have enveloped it with cloths and from other causes too.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as three or four days pass by, then you should loosen the bandage; you will find the bones straightened out, or if they are broken or dislocated, your operation is done in this manner.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If some fingers are broken, then restore those and level them as I have advised you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger with its tendon according to the length of the finger, and let it be somewhat close to you; and also put your hand on this table which is recommended for you, and strengthen that at a downward angle.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken are the bones of two or three or more fingers, then cover each finger with its quantity enveloped in a lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of your chest, standing on one of the corners of the table so that the hand has good control.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is necessary for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we mentioned about these other fractures of accidents as said; and pause your treatment for any occurrence that happens.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Regarding the fracture of the uterus, and the bone of the penis, as well as the prostate gland.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the uterus of a woman is broken, then let her lie down in this position with both knees bent, and incline her to the side slightly, keeping it supported behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife presses on her abdominal region, and it should be done in her abdomen like she hopes; and so the woman is bent over, and both of her legs are lifted gradually, until this whole area is out that is located before the exit point of the abdominal cavity as she hopes and the bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, she lifts her head with ease and facilitates urine flow, and returns it as long as you mix that according to the way she has started eating, and then return to her original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or about those periods, until that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stretch it over the penis with a cannula of reed; and immerse the whole bladder in her abdomen, and then inflate it inside the abdomen through the cannula as soon as the bladder is inflated within, until the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then fill her with water and let it stay for several days as we have prescribed, until she is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the knee of man or woman is broken, then in the restoration and adjustment of her/him, administer what we have prescribed for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is straight is not concealed in these nearby fractures for the most part, which do not occur often, mainly because those who have studied and know this my free reasoning; for that fracture means to you in the major directions via of direction in restoration and constriction of him/her, therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the case of bending the knee in men, take up the knee, and put the knee into that; then place your hand over her knee envelopment of bandage, and she should be covered, then leave her for three days or about those periods, until she is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Head 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for those who suffer from fractures infected, and especially if the bone is large such as the bone of the elbow or the humerus, or similar to these, that you consider them and immediately apply leeches and bloodletting to them as soon as your conditions allow or confirm so as we have said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection drains out slowly, then seek that you consider the retention of it away where you pulverize over her burned spot, if there is no other cause present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then start restoring the fracture on that very day, and do not prolong this if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess does occur with cautery, then you pause the restoration of her/him until the abscess subsides, and do not approach him/her on the third day and throughout the entire week, where you will cause harm by this.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone is prominent over the exposed wound, then seek that you forcefully reduce it and make it even with your own hands in a manner that facilitates and limits its excessive extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not prepared for you and the equality of her/him with your own hands, then reduce it using this instrument; and this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches long, and its width according to the amount of infection; thus, a surgeon needs three or four of these according to the quantity that they require for treatment in all kinds of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And make it round, and be gentle with her/him in such a way that it does not bend, you should press on it during the time of surgery.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have an acute end with her/him at the ends of them; and it should be straight everywhere except in parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how she/he is:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it's called in Greek "laboring hernia", therefore it's a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that she/he is placed with the extremity of her/him raised above the prominent part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it into a groove until the bone returns and is equalized with some equality.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is subtle, and does not take that with good access, then seek that you insert her/his bone end into a place where the instrument can do this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone of all as we have prescribed, then cut it with whatever is suitable for her/him among the scalpel knives that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then cut down to what is rough on the bone and the small, fading edges.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the pain in the patient becomes extremely intense afterwards, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore, give this to the patient a large amount of rest.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	After you have completed your restoration for the bone and then soak bandages in a dark tincture of vitriol, especially if it's summer, do not cover the wound with ointment or any other cause that might smell like vinegar, so as not to cause blisters and corrosion on him/her.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And immediately administer plasters during the time of your completion of bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered to let it heal naturally; scrape the debris with a spoon and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take care to use all caution not to contaminate the wound at the fracture site, as doctors have shown this over time, and let nothing happen that could cause damage or corrosion on their limbs or body, thus ensuring healing.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your tightness is light, soft, different from the tightness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those harmful accidents that we have mentioned, and there is pain in that area, then do not press on those points, but make an area with hard cloth instead of plasters, and support it where needed.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And as the wound begins to heal after about one or two days, have someone support it with your hand which you had placed on that area before, and then apply ointments, those we commonly use for healing wounds, such as tetrachemical ointment, in that place.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And ensure that you loosen the bandage and check the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and sealed, then make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that perspiration can flow from you to the parts left with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound lasts for several days and does not consolidate or is not removed by your hand, then you will have to wait until you can remove any pus from the wound with attempts.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those that are separated from each other remove and extract them, those that are not separated from them, if they cause pain upon the limb, perform scraping as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if pus or scabs appear on the wound, it is inflammation or another form of corruption and decay, then be careful not to touch each one with what you determine for it according to the treatment which has been described in its chapter regarding the healing process.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in the case where you should let the best judgment guide and your presence be: when the bone is fractured, press on the limb as if it were the bone of the thigh and helper like those of large limbs, and do not assume damage to them, nor the extraction of those that have formed with this, leading to death; hold it there where it can settle, which will fall by itself approximately 20 or 30 days. And then treat the wound if you have seen it, and if not, leave that area alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of healing that occurs in the remnants of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Pus that forms during this healing are characteristic of the residual healing from a fracture, and particularly when it is close to the joints, and makes the figure of the limb protrude; and forcefully prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the nodule is recent and administer medicines that have a止血effect such as aloes, poppies, herbs, vinegar, and hot water; examine them carefully and apply them. Consider using some or all of these, and test whether they are applied to stop bleeding or to white water, or with honey on oil, then place that over the nodule in a cloth, and compress those onto you for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction without removing that for several days; then loosen it and repeat another one, until the nodule is reduced; or strengthen with a sheet of lead underneath, which has the property to reduce everything that inflates in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the nodule has already turned yellow and is hardened, if necessary, start removing it gradually, then cut along the pus-overflowing part of it, eliminate excess or reduce it with certain remedies until it is reduced. Then treat that area until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored, and then this manual instructs you to restore the subtle and flexible parts not according to their natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and this manual instructs you to manually restore the subtle and flexible parts, then it should only be done for certain causes: of which one is an excess of fluid in the ligament and the connection made not according to how they should; or due to excess tightness of the ligaments within which nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excess grease; or due to excessive movement before its time; or due to lack of strength throughout the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of this is to give relief to the patient and make the body tender so that strength multiplies in it; then take baths; and apply healing and rest on you.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place grease on the limb, so that the grease draws out its nourishing force, or continue to apply the patient's greasy grease with hot water, until nutrition flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of fractured bones that are restored in a tortuous manner, and you should refrain from performing operations according to what you do.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the already restored member during its healing of deformation and protrusion at the broken bone and nodule, as if it is forced into shape of the limb; however, the member should not be prohibited from its natural operation, so you must accept the word of that person whose limb exists in a new broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly reproachable, leading to great fear of the sign which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If there are recent limping and swelling, then they should be immersed in hot water containing soothing herbs such as mint leaves and other plants; do this for the affected area with a moist dressing like chamomile tea; or prepare the dressing with a paste of almond leaves well made; or use a mucilage from almond seeds and apply it with gauze or oil of camphor, then cover it with that; or use fat figs and wrap them in linen threads, similar to those used in medications known as consolidants.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by regular light rubbing that is done with the most humid substances, and should be administered movements of the member in all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twist has already progressed and is made forcefully and transformed into pain and caused by the need for treatment with iron, then consider that pus is above it, and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and what should be applied excessively from the swelling of that substance on the bone using sharp instruments, and it should be administered in that area with diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speaking about dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any joint in its place, which prevents movement and causes it to appear deformed, leading to large injuries and pain on the body.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when a dislocation occurs, you should immediately puncture so that it can be reduced, and do not delay in reducing it, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and stiffened by the body, making the reduction of dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this, do not make the person either hot or stretched during the time of inflammation, which causes intense cramps and piercing pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, you should take care of the patient with the hot needle on the body, and allow it to remain inside until the inflammation rests. And place the limb in warm water and oil, and then reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with that which will remember its place when recalled.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now I shall order the chapters of dislocation according to what has been mentioned about fractures; from one part of the body, above the part with pus, to another part below it.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When the two jaws are dislocated but do not click; and the dislocation of both is performed according to one of two methods: either they are partially returned to their places by a little movement, and are soothed somewhat; or they are completely dislocated in full dislocation, within which they are softened at the part of the joint where saliva from the body flows, and cannot hold that nor can they close their mouth, and the tongue of them is enveloped in its own way.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, then in the major positions it returns by itself due to a little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and full, then you should administer a gentle reduction to it, and do not delay in doing it completely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And let the doctor have the head of the body, and insert the surgeon at the place of one hand in the tooth area of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is from one part; or insert his two hands simultaneously if the dislocation is from both parts, and the rest of his commands on all other matters should be outside those with which he equates; and command the body to stop its jaws and allow them to go in every direction; and the surgeon aligns the jaw and pushes the jaw back into place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer sweat with warm water and oil, during which a slight reduction should be done for both, and do not delay the full reduction of both, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when they return and are aligned, and the mouth of the body is closed and is not soothed, then pause on those powder dusts from wax with cerot, and make it out of wax and oil rubbed; and then be applied with ease with moist wraps.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the body sleep on its back, with his head between two pillows, so that it does not heat in the right or left part; and do not force him to eat any food by compulsion; have his meal be forbidden lion meat, until such time as the pains are soothed and the jaws are opened, then let him eat what he wishes.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking and gargling until the jaw is opened and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated in any hour and have not been converted to their respective places, then intense cramps occur causing fevers and excessive heat, and the body's belly becomes swollen and there is strong nausea with pure colic.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, then know that it is a loss; and intense cramps will kill the one to whom such happens in three days.
Capitol .xxv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not dislocated within the thorax due to its continuity with the ribs; sometimes it is dislocated at the part outside, which is indicated by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And apply pressure with your palm at the site with strong pressure, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place an ointment and powder on that, strengthen that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the end of that which is located in your chest be continuous with it, not dislocated on any day; then know that it should be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said and according to what you are equipped for.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place an ointment and powder on that area, apply pressure, and command the patient to maintain rest and ease until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, it reduces the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Section Title: XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	The reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the place of the nipple to the place below.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is done by twisting; and it is not dislocated from behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and set outside at the places below of the nipple, especially in those where there are few muscles, somewhat dislocated; but in those with many muscles, it remains out due to difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often happens in some people due to impact or blow, and the muscle of him gets swollen with a hematoma from the heated needle, and it is displaced due to that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore know how you treat this when you are overstretched by him, and then proceed in the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And when you know the dislocation of him which is at the places below of the nipple; thus distinguish between the displaced muscle and the intact muscle, which you find among those with obvious differences; and find in the head of the muscle a concavity and place the nipple behind the head of the muscle as if it were an hourglass, and the patient cannot return his hand to its own elbow, nor that one further by any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from below the foot or on it, then you easily find it by touch and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And with this kind of dislocation, a gentle reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to above for him; then place your fingers behind the nipple of him and raise the joint with strength to its place; the minister raises the hand of him and extends it in such a way; then press it gently so that it returns somewhat.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if for what we have said it does not return, and is due to the nature that causes dislocation, several days later know that the patient should bathe in cold water and take a soothing treatment that moisturizes and calms as if they were their own skin of altitude, fenugreek, and wild thyme in water, and should be taken.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should lie on his back and be held behind the nipple of him with wool that is equal between lightness and constriction, and place the doctor's arm over the spot, and raise the head of the muscle vertically, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not hurt at the places below, and another minister should hold the head of the patient so that it does not get hurt at the places below which it returns to its place almost immediately.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and he stands on his own side, and puts his muscle behind the nipple of the patient and raises the nipple above him in such a way that the patient hangs in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the places below his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is slight, then know that something else causing him to be suspended, because seriously enough it returns almost immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced gently according to another manner: and that it be placed in the ground a long rod whose tip has a round shape like the handle of a mortar, not thick nor thin, and then place the patient over the tip of the rod with lions' skins, and the patient stands according to the length of the rod, and then extend his hand at the places below from the other side; and stretch his body on the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce him due to all the causes we've mentioned, then use this remedy: and that you take a rod whose length is two arms' long, its width is four digits, and its thickness should be the width of your nipple in such a shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And around the head cover it with lion's skin so that the heat does not harm the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place a cushion under you, supporting the patient's buttocks, and extend your hand or arm over the heat inside the parts where you are working, and place the heat on the helper and the arm and the end of your hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Place your arm on a scale ladder according to the width, and extend your hand at the parts you are working, and the other leg hangs from the other side, so that the joint is within reach.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And as the treatment of your patient is completed according to whatever method possible, then cover that you pause under their buttocks with a piece of wool equal in quantity; and place ready-made plaster on them made from powdered moli and egg white over all the muscle; so when it is mixed above, and place your hand firmly under their buttocks; and the treatment is mixed over the plaster, and your hand is connected to their neck, and left there, and your hand of your patient should not be disturbed for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And when the food of the patient is slightly reduced, within which their member is comfortable, which is easier for the healing of them.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And gradually increase the food to about seven or five days and exercise some movement; and therefore if it is closed and not softened, then they are already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	May it be that the joint is dislocated due to wetness causing them or by other causes, then when in that place a cautery should be applied for three times, as was stated in the chapter of cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and seven days have passed, then the muscle and joint are relieved of its stiffness on some applications, and it is not closed or hardened, and that arm cannot lift above their parts, then you should know that their nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done to their feet or behind the mammary gland, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension at their hands, so that it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other treatment is administered in that place, and treat it while it heals.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is a severe healing in the limb and tardiness in their movement, then the patient uses baths with hot water during which that heaviness should be relieved and return to their natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, but mostly forwards or backwards. The dislocation of it does not hide from you when you feel or touch it according to any figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated thigh, this is made clear to you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch their muscle at that place.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when you grasp both of them, reduce the dislocation as soon as it reaches their wound heat, for if it reaches their wound heat, it is difficult to reduce this, and it will not be healed completely; especially when it's on the rear parts, which are worse than all other types of dislocations, and from pain, hot baths result in death for that one.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of them, when this is possible to reduce it, is that their hand should be extended at two sides, and their arm should be stretched out, and the doctor's elbows are on their hip, under your place, and you push the joint with his fists in turn or inside his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	May it be that the dislocation is on the front parts, then return as such that bends the hand at their own hand, while striking the hip inside his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that two ministers stretch their arms, and have that strain of the body by them so that it should not be exaggerated against extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate their arm in all parts, as it is enveloped by a doubled long cloth over their hand, or muscle.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, apply some oil to that for so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint make it easier; and then push the joint with strong impulse until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And when the reduction of them is covered by pausing on that plaster in which stiffness and movement are provided for egg white, and it is stretched with firmness downwards, and the arm is hung from the neck, and left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release the muscle of them and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you apply more plaster and muscle, and leave that for some days until it is strengthened; and then release that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	May it be that there is heaviness near the reduction of the joint, and their position is in movement, then apply moisture in bath and subtle friction, compressing, until it is relieved; or pause on the joint alternately, which is a thick flesh; then bind it and leave that for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then hold that there, put some butter on it; and when it gets wet, then you rub the joint with a tempered friction, and repeatedly apply this treatment with various oils, once, and again, and the third time, and so on.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The text translates to: "Corruption has already spread within the body cavity during surgery, once it is inside the limit."
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and scorched hole in the cow's skin, pressing and rubbing it. Do this for several times until that area is damp again and then return it to its original position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation in the arm and hand joint, it is between the joint itself.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In the hand, some veins are displaced, and the reduction of dislocation is easy, but for other joints, more effort is needed. However, it's crucial to move the limb quickly during its reduction before it gets frozen or if an abscess occurs in that area.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of dislocation in the hand is that you place the wrist joint of the patient on a table and extend their arm. The doctor should hold their hand or palm over the edge of the joint area, and by pushing into it, make the limb return to its correct position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it's important to consider whether the palm is already in the hand's belly (chest area), then the patient should place their hands on a table and extend them for the extension and reduction; if the dislocation occurred previously, both hands are needed, then naturally the position of the patient's arm should be over the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over this edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; and if not, then press that with ointment that soothes the abscess and let it alone. And don't repeat this process, because otherwise, you can neither endure nor manage its reduction when other things start happening to him over time.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint should be treated according to its degree of distortion; and do not blame the patient for any reason, just because their arm is softened and can't endure any cause; then you'll understand that the nerves are irritated or torn, and in this case, instead of a cautery around it, strengthen it with heat and let them take care of this themselves.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And once it has returned, then place your hand on the ointment that we have applied and leave it there for three days while strengthening it; and later make sure to relieve any strain and leave it alone, letting their arm be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the motion of that remains and any gravity occurs, then apply that with warm water and some friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Several times you should dislocate the fingers in every direction.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one finger is dislocated towards the back of the palm or inside it, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the tip of the finger, hang it from the part where it is dislocated, and leave it alone for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then hang that outwards until its rightness is equal to that day's position.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it begins to heal in the night, lie that according to that narrative, and do not stop exercising that during the day and with movements, and lie that at night; and do this for a few days until it is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And pretend to do this even if it's dislocated in the chest of the hand, and lie that towards that side and perform your first operation on this, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it's dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulders.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens with any of the shoulder blades or collarbone causing full dislocation, and if there's a lot of pain in those places, then there's no cure for this, because death is feared by the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's body discharge comes out forcefully against their will and they can't hold it back. Several times you should soften some limbs or both knees or their arms, or one of those; or if mass friction is applied to one shoulder blade in its place, then with mass friction, it causes moving these four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And once it's moved back to the parts behind, it is named galebozia.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of this is that you then need to consider if galebozia occurs during childhood, in which case there's no cure nor healing for it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	And in those that come through injury or impact or similar to those, the Ancients would say that their treatment methods are lengthy and exhaustive; however, I have shortened it from the one you often justify with too much of this, because of my close proximity to your understanding explanation, which is what I've elaborated and organized using various tools for which I show this and explain this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And they say that in galebozia occurring from the part behind in the legs, it's not good nor is there healing for this; similarly with the one made on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is cured only that which happens in the feet properly among what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And have the patient lie on their face with the back close to a wall, and stretch them out further below their feet in such a way that not even the toes touch.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And have a straight stick placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the foot near the head, and another stick opposite their feet at the other end of the body.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the stick, not to be fixed in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap over the head of the patient and tie the lion's girth firmly around it; extend the end of the girth to the stick, which should be at the head of them, and secure that on them; and strengthen the other girth around their buttocks and the heels of them, aiming for their chests; and adjust all the girdles and tie those onto the other stick which aims at their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister extends the girth to the juncture of the stick, and do not let the two sticks or the girdles on their body areas where they are fixed touch each other entirely, rather, it should not be as tight as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his hands on the vertebra with strength between which it returns, or places one hand on that surface, and adjust their feet to return under that table.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	May if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is approximately three braccia away from the wall which we said is near the patient's body at the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the table under the vertebra, and the doctor stands on the other end; he strengthens his feet in such a way that the vertebra is tightened and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open both sides that are twisted around the hand; and it is that you place in the ground the head of the patient at the end of each stick on the buttocks, where the length of each stick is a braccia. And place the head of them similarly under two sticks on the buttocks; and let the length be between any stick one palm's length. It has already been done so that each pull is made in such a way within each stick turning around it, and each is firmly placed in the ground so that they are not disturbed.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make a stick on which the turn is made, and it should twist in both turns of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of which is a turn on which a stick is formed, the length of which is one hand's length where it twists; and in the other two sticks there are similar ones.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the girdles that you have tightened around the feet of the patient on the turn which should be at their head, and tighten the girdles that you have tightened around their thighs in the turn which should be under their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And you must have each turn with one minister who twists the turn around their hand, and the doctor matches the vertebra according to what we said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how the turn should be done:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And this is how the process goes once the vertebra has returned and the location matched: take a tallow wax poultice and stop it; then place it on the poultice until you have a table whose width can be three inches or about those, and its length covers the area of the fat, over the juncture of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And after that, use the poultice as we said, and let the patient eat fine nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any lingering discomfort in the area at the end of healing, then it should be administered with medicines that soften and clean until long after the table has been used, which we have recommended; and already lead sheet is being administered in that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some inflammations may occur at the end of the vertebral columns on both sides, and it gets caught with that dislocation; and that's the place which already inflamed so that you shouldn't suspect anything to happen to him from this medicine, which will cause his death to occur.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capítulo xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that only a dislocation occurs at the junction of the thigh bone and the muscle joint, not to those what happens in other joints with minor movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the junction of the thigh is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated towards the inside parts, or towards the outside parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mostly dislocated to the inside parts, and little to the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	A sign of the dislocation towards the inside parts is this: when you adjust the healthy buttock against the patient's buttocks, it becomes longer and the heel becomes more prominent than on the healthy side; the patient cannot bend their foot up to their leg, so they must bend them backwards. This is where you place a cautery stick at the edge of the sticking point, because the top of the thigh bone has already penetrated here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign for the one where dislocation occurs is towards the outside parts; it's that Lu's accidents are against this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And as for the person to whom you have caused dislocation in their joints, it is a sign that their intestine expands according to its capacity, however, it does not double the pain that was there before. If this continues and cannot proceed beyond the affected area; their urine is retained, they are prevented from swelling, and you should walk around them on the talus.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And as for the person to whom you have caused dislocation at their back parts, it is a sign that they do not expand this area anymore, nor can they double up against what doubles their swelling. Their intestine is shorter than the other one's, and their swelling is relieved, the tip of the thigh is where you should address this issue.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	A possible reduction of this dislocation is what you should consider. If the dislocation is old and long-standing, then, when addressing your patient for treatment, you may proceed with reducing their condition according to their situation, not considering it as a complete cure; therefore, there's no need to think that in this treatment alone, everything will be fixed.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the one where dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocation, then you should guide your effort towards reversing the joint and extending it both internally and externally. Move it to the right and left sides where it returns to its normal position without needing any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it doesn't return in this manner, then you should prepare to apply force and extend the patient's intestine from its side or over their chest, or directly on where it is protruding; another should spread their hand above this so that their fingers come into contact with them. And reinforce by pressing tightly at the junction of the thigh, while having another hold onto the extremity of the ligament firmly and steadily.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And whether it is an extension of the patient or of the internal part towards the swelling on the sternum partition, or of the back part to the partition at the second rib.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And when all these extensions are done in one go, so that the patient is lifted up to their earth-based body height and hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common for all four kinds.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it's good; and otherwise, then for every kind of treatment that you should consider on your own.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In your own reduction, when dislocated internally, the patient should be tilted back onto their left side. Then place the ligaments on the junction of the thigh where they are located between the knee and the area that leads to swelling; then extend the ligament from the side opposite the swelling towards the other partition of the sternum.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another should firmly take hold of the patient's arms. Tighten up on the large area of the thigh, and extend the parts outward with strong extension until that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this kind is of lighter treatment compared to other types, in which this member is reduced.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if you are excused from following this method of treatment for all these kinds, then you should have the two feet of the patient lying at the same time on a strong ligament, gently and firmly, on both heels and both ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each is by quantity of four inches. And the thigh extends more than the other by a quantity of two inches.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And so the patient should be suspended from the head of the spine, and in their right hand. And the length of the earth's part is the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so command a strong youth to pinch the top of the thigh, and have them suspended by another youth's thigh, and the other youth to pinch the thing with such force that it returns at speed to its place.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in your own reduction, when dislocation is external at the hip part, have the thigh push against the ground as we instructed during our yellow treatment. And strengthen the ligament over the outer thigh precisely and over its foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two poles, one under the foot of the patient and the other on the head; and adjust two poles in the middle of the knee placed with wet cloths wrapped around them, so that the thigh of the patient is not dampened because the pole is between their thighs. And when you extend the parts, you mustn't pull it too much.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each should extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand completes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you adhere to this reversal, it will greatly be good; and otherwise, pause on that diligently and similarly as we said during our yellow treatment for that equality.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And have the thigh lie on their sides quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the front parts, then have the intestine extended slightly, and as per this method described on the knee; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the protruding thigh, and has him push against that with his other hand, and through that pressure he pauses while extending it to the front parts towards the area where the dislocation occurred.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back parts, then it should not have the thigh extended to the front parts, but be lifted above the ground. Having said that, place it on a hard cause as when you would do when lying down if its width has been dislocated outward, according to what we said about the position of your body between two widths; and both their faces and their ligaments should be extended as we have stated, almost without error.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And ensure that a compress is placed on the area where there is pain in the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And once the reduction is completed according to this, if - and you are sure that there is no sign of the reduction in your view, then extend the patient's legs. And when you make these movements equal, and the patient bends their body so that it extends its leg and expands their excuse, then you know which part of the body, once reduced, has been returned - and then you adjust the thighs and apply a poultice and stretch them as much as possible on this side; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then loosen the ligament and poultice, and compare one leg against the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And when you see these movements in the bed, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and hence allow the patient to move.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then you return and plaster that area, and stretch it according to your first correction, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that area, and have the patient walk around on both feet for several days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated to the outside of the joint, and inwardly towards the joint cavity, and further outwards than the latter. It is not dislocated from the front side.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is when you command the patient to put their arm against their thigh; then you know that the shoulder has been dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is to make the patient lie down straight, as if they were extending their arm above them, if possible; attach your two hands to their face, and place their foot between your feet; then guide the shoulder into your palms, hold those between your fingers on the patient's shoulder with strength, and another serves to extend their foot until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of restoration is that their arm sticks to the thigh without causing any strain.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster that area and have the arm stick to the thigh, then rest those parts on one side for three or four days, then loosen those areas.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk around for a few days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Perhaps if your reduction of the patient is justified, then administer strong extension to the ligaments as described in the previous narrative about the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The collarbone can sometimes be caused by slight trauma, and at other times it is dislocated according to the completeness of the injury. The dislocation of the collarbone occurs either inside or outside the joint.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of collarbone dislocation is that you see the collarbone swollen proceeding to the part where it has been dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	Perhaps the treatment for the removal of this is a mild restoration, that it be extended with ease on the chest and made equal until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	Perhaps in the treatment for when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient lie straight, and have one servant hold that part strongly and bravely behind their arm on the middle of them.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then have your right hand under the patient's foot on the higher part of their body, and with your left hand on the lower part of the chest near the belly.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the body towards you with your right hand, and with the left by two parts, and extend it on the left side; and push the feet of the chest to the right against their arm.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make those movements in that way as we have discussed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the feet towards the arm on the third part, and you are at the belly.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two movements as per this manner, and if you see the body equalized, it's good; but otherwise, then on the patient do the operation again, which is when it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Perhaps if you are prohibited from reducing the patient as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and hold a small pillow motionably on solid ground, and place that between their thighs, and already wrap a blanket around them so they don't move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the attendant should have their hands on their thighs, and another servant extends their foot against the extension of their side or onto the ligament that lies over the chest; and each person should extend themselves against the extension of their own partner, and the pillow stays between the patient's thighs holding them, so their body is not pulled towards the outer parts opposite their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor equalizes the dislocation on their own side, and another attendant holds the healthy thigh in the outer parts, where the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you declare the health of the reduction in your view, then rest with plastering and stretch that vigorously on the ligaments, and join the foot to the arm.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And when you fear or protect yourself from the nerves that are behind on the leg, to ensure that the ligament over there is not overly strong and does not hurt it heavily.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And let that rest for two or three days; if the ligament has softened, stretch it out.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or fourth, gently untie that area, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Mayhaps if it is forced to go before that space, without safety the dislocation might not dissolve and become rotten, and so that nothing receives treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that there is an abscess, then consider what we described in the conclusion of this narrative, elsewhere in the area of healing and dressing, until it is well treated.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On treatment for dislocation of the feet' fingers.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When that which is dislocated has been extended slightly for six sessions; and what is not difficult, before it becomes easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	Perhaps if the dislocation is in some toes of both feet, then consider that you make the patient stand on a level surface or on a table, and remain like they would walk.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then stand on your feet, place your hand under where you are pressing the joints, and gently press it onto your foot with strength until it returns, and see that it is already evened out and does not appear in the pressed area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the patient's foot on a table that supports all of their foot, with two points, and strengthen it with a strong and sturdy structure for three days; and then gently untie it and allow rest from walking for several days, until it is strengthened and its functionality can be assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation that occur from injury or fracture, or at any time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those happens, and you fail in the treatment of that or in restoring them, deaths result from these.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And do not presume over the treatment of them yourself, but rather someone who is skilled in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, not hasty, without zeal or presumptuous; they should use only those medicines that help to subdue abscesses, allowing the patient to remain under divine judgement, not towards themselves seeking salvation from loss, with alleviation of their illness in which you have some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then make every effort to promptly reduce them during the onset of the cause before an abscess appears.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that helps with abscess dressing and treats injuries using what you judge suitable from desiccated ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation occurs from a fracture and there is separation of the bones, then you make the bones straight, and proceed as we have said in the simple injuries on this topic, where it was preceded by the locations of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And observe and avoid according to your virtue that of the medicine in the ways of fear as it has preceded my teaching; for what is better to you you should do to your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more healing to your body when you see those things in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	So ends the words of Al-Buqais, perfectly from which God may be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
