Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Al-Baghdadi.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, children, let me fulfill this book to you as the final part of the science of medicine, for the completion of which your health is sought, and through its exposition, and through your declarations, I see it necessary to complete this treatise that I am presenting to you, which is a part of my work, so it's surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation on the hand is confined in our region and in our times to be private, through which great danger prevails in the science of it, and its vestiges are remaining; and one would not have heard much about it had there been no occasional small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which corrected their most errors and misconceptions in which the understanding of it is confined and the effort goes beyond its force and skill.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And I see that I should vivify this order of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation; and for bringing it up with the forms of the tools of cautery and other workshop instruments like adding a declaration, and for preparing them, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why not many skilled craftsmen are found in their hands in our time is that the art of medicine is extensive, and one needs to be trained before becoming proficient in the science of anatomy which Gualia describes where he knew the joints of the limbs and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; and had knowledge of bones, nerves, and blood vessels, their number, and their function; and of pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the sites for their insertion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And that's why it is said by Hippocrates that in his name, the operation exists, but more so in practice and predominantly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	May we have already mentioned this in the introduction to this book; whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, cannot be excused from falling into error which can lead to the death of men, as I have seen too many of them, where some are formed in this science and abandon it for their own science and experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I have seen a surgeon who has been involved in treating an abscess of the scrophula on a woman's neck and cut some neck arteries causing large amounts of blood to flow, resulting in her death amidst his patients.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who was about to take out a stone from a man who had been suffering in his state, and the stone was large, it came out alive and dried that stone with a piece of bladder, as a result, that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I already attempted to remove that, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient underneath him, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another surgeon who was taking payment from the Duke of our land for surgery, and he attended to a black soldier who had broken his leg in the thigh area; the surgeon, due to his lack of knowledge, removed the fracture, on the wound, with splints and pins made of strong material, and did not allow air into the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he then removes it according to his wishes, and then he dresses the wound, and allows him to rest for several days as instructed to remove the bandage; this also occurs when bone and flesh have formed an abscess, leading to loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I have attempted to do this, and I was able to remove the bandage, thus achieving calmness and alleviation of her pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption had been confirmed in the limb, so I could not contain it and it did not stop spreading the corruption throughout the limb while the patient's life was at risk.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another surgeon who punctured an abscess of cancerous origin, and became inflamed within several days, causing great concern for the lord of his patient.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is because the disease affects only melancholic humor, so it does not penetrate through every part of the body, but rather targets a limb that allows everything to be affected from within.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on your hand be divided into two: one associated with health and another where danger lies in major positions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already established this throughout this book in which there is an operation where errors and fears occur; so it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and refrain from this, so the pages do not slander or defame you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons for solicitude and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best means through God's grace for the sake of health and achievable success, and leave behind your patients' terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and keep away from your weapons on what causes fear in you, because stability is found in your faith and your name will not abandon you: so it remains at your glory, more so among people and further among your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia had already spoken in some of his proverbs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Don't treat bad patients with bad medicine, for it's not the doctors who are named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered concerning the feet, in the forms of the tools and in the materials of the cautery instruments, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning dryness and puncture, as well as blisters, and leeches, and the extraction of arrows and their resemblance to those, all detailed and organized by the forms of the tools.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of twists and their resemblance to those; chapter ordered concerning operations in the feet, and the forms of the tools.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Regarding the cautery with fire and with acute medicine, and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	And this begins the discussion on everything free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Let me tell you about the quality of those parts of the cautery and their natural development, as well as when it is forbidden to use a cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I say that the discussion on the nature of the cautery's youth and its natural development is long and exhaustive, subtle in science, and secret hidden; and many great sages have spoken about it before me, differing in their opinions. Enough for me to understand a little from these discussions, as they fear prolonged discourse.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And I say that the cautery is in harmony with all substances universally, whether they be simple matter or compound matter, except for two substances; these are the substances of the tail.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail and in dryness there is simple matter that would be dried out; some argue that a cautery should be applied to those parts, while others argue against this claim, stating that it's not appropriate for maladies characterized by their quality and dryness. For fire itself embodies quality and dryness, and it would therefore be inconvenient to apply it to the tail and keep it in a state of being burnt and dried up until it is healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And argues against what you said by stating that when applied to the entire tail and dryness in every bodily malady, fire makes youth appear on all of them. When comparing the body of a person and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the body is frayed.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the discussion of this, something that has already been discovered by me after some experiments for many times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not delve into what has already been discussed extensively in the chapter on cautery for recent examination, and have come to understand the variety of bodily conditions among people and the disposition of their maladies in different parts, as well as the causes of these, the incidents related to them, and the time period required for such matters.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	For other conditions, there is no need for concern, especially in cases of oily and wet maladies, which have already been agreed upon by all doctors, they are not divided on the matter of using a cautery for youthfulness in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Know this, children, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness lies in the use of burning medicine with it; because fire is simple, its action only affects the member being cauterized and not other members, so its impact on them is limited to minor harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the burning medicine reaches up to those members that are affected by it, and strongly tends to cause difficulty in healing and strong disturbance in the diseased member.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Fire, due to its simplicity and goodness of substance, does not do anything other than overflow. We have come to know this through experiments and the long duration of service and study in the art of understanding the truth about causes; and that's why I excuse myself for the length of the discourse. If it weren't for the fact that such a secret was not written down freely in my book, concerning fire and its quality, as well as the nature of the operation within bodies and its expulsion through which you expel diseases, this philosophical demonstration would be beneficial to your inquiries.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know this, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and prefer the best springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at any time, because the harm caused by accidental time periods is drowned in the youth of what is attracted to the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and pimples, which do not suffer from delay as those that cause mischief are greater than minor harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And don't worry about this in your inquiries, or children, those who only value the common people and mere doctors do not consider that it is not always beneficial to heal with cautery for every malady, they simply follow a rule based on that.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not as they fear, for cautery is simply another kind of medicine that alters the condition and dries out the humidity which causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, unnecessary cautery over medicine for the sake of its effectiveness and virtue of its operation, as well as its large lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their malady might return at some point in time, according to the nature of the malady and the location of its occurrence, as well as its virtue, what is prepared within them from the addition of superfluities, and what is received by them through food and similar causes leading up to these issues; unless the malady treated with cautery is a subtle malady in parts with few superfluities and humoral substances, like dental cautery for pain and its resemblance to that, it might not return the same kind of pain within them, although this happens on a smaller scale.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	The common language is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this term is professional, not one I understand in them, they believe it's not a cure that enhances with medicine or any other cause leading to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is against that; and I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine only when administering the methods of treatment in some illnesses, and those medicines do not provide relief, so at the end of the case one administers cautery, enhancing to that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here comes the understanding that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding which I comprehend among common folk and many doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they would say that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they wouldn't say otherwise simply for the similarity of gold and the inferiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they would say that the place for cautery doesn't hurt like what they simply declare as absolute truth, which I have already proven and found out that it only hurts in some bodily parts not others; cautery with that is good and better than iron similarly as they said. But however when you do cautery with fire using gold, it's not as it was declared, it depends on the quantity you want based on the heat of the gold, and what needs to be received by the flame; and if you place the flame over it the gold melts in the fire, and inside the fire some sheets are formed so that the artisan can adjust for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, you should do cautery with iron more gently and more precisely in the correct operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, I have arranged those of the section within the feet, for you can ask me what you want from them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding cautery for pain in the head due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery allows the humidity and coldness to have an unfortunate impact of two causes, which are the cause of pain and multiple traumatic discharges, called gushes, from the head to the parts of the body and ears, and multiple sleeps, and toothache and stomachache, and universally for all illness caused by coldness, as well as paralysis, pain, and stroke, and resembling those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is like this, which we first command the patient to be given an emollient medicine on their head for three or four nights according to what suits the patient and their age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place that sponge between your hands on a padded bench, and have him place his head on his own pillow.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand close to that spot on the top of the nose between his ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when you have told me about the right place, you mark that area with a test, and then apply olive oil cautery of which this is its form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the spot where the test has indicated, in such a way that it goes down, as your hand is gradually forced, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see that some amount of hair has been uncovered from the head, as much as the size of a pea, then lift your hand, and if you cannot find any iron in this or another place, if it is cold, within which I have told you to observe what I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the spot, then leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place on him the burned chest in a damp environment, and leave it so that the burnt skin is destroyed by the fire's scabs.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with the fourfold ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they would say that when the wound has been opened like this, it gets better so much more quickly that it is better and more rejuvenating.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they would say that the cautery has been applied inside the jawbone, and it should be kept in place until some part of the bone is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then take this part that adheres to the bone, and proceed to treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they would say that once the cautery reaches to the end, until it penetrates into the bone strongly enough for the bone to break off, and this is how you apply small cautery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate from that area the vapor escaping from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And keep the wound open for a long time, and then proceed to heal it until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Now to me you do not show these two types of cautery for all, but in some cases according to their fear; leave it alone, my friend, much better is with health, when possible; so the head is purified by the solution of continuity like we have testified in other members, and even more so when the patient's head has a cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is more saved and better for me; from that one take it up and do that work with health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Regarding head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When a chronic and long pain occurs throughout the head, and this lasts in the patient's body for an extended period, and they use hot baths, saunas, head compresses, bandages, hats, veils, and similar remedies, especially if it has been treated with one cautery which does not react to those causes, then consider that if the head is robustly created in its nature; and does not endure much heat, then this head is treated with another cautery; leave this one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply a cautery on that above the forehead, inside the head where the wound has split.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Saw the wound and revealed the amount of the bone that we have measured, then apply a cautery on it with an instrument behind the head in the place where suction is called - and this is the place where suction takes place.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And hold your hand in this way, do not expose the bone, for the patient may experience a great variety of pain due to different from all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I shall describe this cautery in its place, that because·l cautery is such that when you apply it to the horns of the head and the occipital bone requires a finer cautery than that which is applied to the mid part of the head; and this is how he should do it.
Capitol ters.	Head treatment.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Regarding non-traditional cautery for migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the back of the head or an ache inside the skull, it should be treated with medicines that reduce headaches, and then other treatments are administered; those were described in my writings on diseases. If all these measures do not alleviate the condition, then the treatment for this would be by two methods: either by applying a hot medicated cautery or using iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	A medicated cautery using a hot substance involves taking one dol of aloes, crushing it and then separating the ends of its two heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then pierce the area of pain on the temple with an awl into that spot where you make the wound, inside which you hide the injury.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen it on you with the constraint of descent and allow that to pass through for the space of three hours; and let out the water from it and leave the wound for two or three days, and place a cover under your hand submerged in water until the place feels firm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment once it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see this, do as I have written about certain hot medicines in my treatise on hot medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cautery with iron follows this method: using fire for the cautery, which is in this form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	This is called a ring cautery; the head of which resembles a thorn, with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small elevation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand on the area of pain, hold it back - so that the metal rod you're using doesn't stick to the surface being treated - and move the small iron tool gradually, with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that sticks due to the resistance of the injury is as much as half its length, lift your hand so that the artery doesn't stick either, so that no blood flow stops.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak your hand in salt water and place it on the area, leave it for three days; and then let it rest with a cloth in water, and treat with ointment once it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see fit, apply the cautery to the end of the blade according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut into an artery in this non-traditional migraine.
Capitol quart.	Head quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Regarding the old tradition of treating migraines with cautery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines as described in the previous treatments and according to the descriptions of diseases, if these measures do not alleviate your condition, or due to illness where what we said about the first cautery with medicine or the one using fire is insufficient for it, then consider igniting the blade cautery until it becomes white hot, so that you apply this over the area of pain along a line whose length is most similar to what was discussed, or do as described; and hold your hand up for a moment and force that into contact with the artery before penetrating the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which becomes accustomed to chewing, and that the tongue does not stick and the nerve that controls it is not affected, and that there be no spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it's about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut, which causes fear during its operation, especially in those who do not know what they are doing and are careless; leave the operation as it began.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come back to remind you of the regulation for blood flow in case of an artery accident according to its method, in this manual.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and when treating the patient's body is tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the head as we have measured it, and treat the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on strech of arteries with hot cauteries, and this is a better and more accurate cautery.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Regarding the treatment of ear pain through cautery.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to friction and if it is treated with draining causes and other treatments which I have described in the division section, and the pain does not increase, then use fire for the cautery, and this is called 'puncture', whose form is:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then puncture close to the ignition point, and let it move around the entire ear like a wheel or in any part if the pain is in any location.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue applying the earlobe cautery little by little until you succeed in placing it where needed.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is applied to all parts of the earlobe, and then fixes it in place, then you should also treat the areas inside so that they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi. (This could be an abbreviation or part of a larger text, possibly related to medical terminology where 'Capitol' refers to the head and '.vi.' stands for "viscera".)
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Regarding earlobe cautery.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The earlobe which is treated and by cautery is nothing other than the specific substances that pass through phlegm, as we said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid earlobe cautery for the substance that passes due to drying or due to spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that earlobe substance with jujubes, calms and cures, without confirming your treatment, then it is that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first should be at the earlobe, the second a bit in his ear canal, and the third should be on the junction of both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the affected ear, where mollification does not come but in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is that you cauterize there at the earlobe's tip for a bit above on the corner of the head, and in the ear canal elsewhere, the length of which should be according to the length of that lump, then place your hand inside until the amount of the substance of the disease is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the method of cautery, and it's a speciality of the surgeon, whose form should be on front table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it's rather subtle that one needs to do this a little bit with the earlobe; and you should notice when it gets rid of excess roughness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area where what is before passes, until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Regarding old apoplectic cautery.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we've said without confirming your treatment and the patient doesn't have fever, then apply four cauteries: over all the corners of his head; like we've said also for the middle part of the head; and do so on the stomach.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of cautery is done according to what was mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And when it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; then treat what you have started.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Regarding cautery for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	And when given to the patient during meals, large jujubes and pills should help in their digestion.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the head completely of the patient and place a plaster in their stomach as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And let that stand for some times, which is the method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to that order of methods I've already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if through these good healings; and otherwise, then do this to him three times on the last part of his head, those that descend from the more prominent part of the head into the less prominent part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery for as much time as it takes to do that, and then treat the resulting cautery as necessary.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if you increase the tolerance of the patient and the disease is manageable, then apply the cautery in the middle part; and if your addition is greater, then do so over both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And treat that until it heals; and let the olive oil cautery be as described in front.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol .ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Regarding cautery for parasites and overall healing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	And when you proceed with digestion of the head with jujubes and as we've said; then shave the head of the patient, and then apply cautery in the middle part of the head, and do so over all the corners of the head, and do so on the last part of him, and apply three cauterizations on the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of healing the body by many people and the disease is strong, then apply four cauterizations over both necks, and subsequently apply cautery until it burns out from the patient's inner parts, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And treat that until it heals; and let this be olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Cauterization is not done for epilepsy, except when it's due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And when you digest the brain at the beginning of his meals with jujubes and another treatment as we've described in the division when the patient is tolerant to medicine side effects.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it's a child that doesn't tolerate the medicines, then administer calms and chewable pills to help with digestion, before that for several days, in preparation of food assimilation.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and apply cautery in one place on his head according to the previous method, and do another cautery on the back of the head, and over every corner of his head he applies cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can endure it, then apply a cautery point as I said, with paralysis-inducing and calming effects on the heart over the cervical spine's vertebrae and the thoracic spine's vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let there be an olive oil cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the treatment of melancholy with a cautery.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are dampness corrupted and flesh weakened, then apply a cautery point as we have said in the presence of paralysis-inducing effects.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is damp, then let them drink what purges the brain as we have described in the previous section.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And draw near to the head of the patient, and prepare decently to apply tar on this side over the circle, and place that tar in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be sixty years old, and take care of them from every part.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And apply liniment; it is more worthy to use an old remedy for sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire until you have prepared a suitable warmth by measure, which makes the patient feel more when it becomes too much.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And apply that in the middle of the head on this side in the circle, and let him stay inside until it is cooled down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient every week once, in accordance with his other regimen of drinking water until he is healed; or if you wish, apply this method by making small punctures according to what suits him best, or else keep your hand on an ordered cautery: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And apply that cooked butter in fat or in grease.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the treatment of descending water with a cautery.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have been informed about the beginning of water in the stomach according to the symptoms I described in the previous section, then start and give the patient what purges their head, and protect them from all dampness.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that sugar dissolve in water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to clean their head, and apply a cautery on this side of the head; and then apply two points with two cauteries if it is the beginning of water in two stomachs, or one point if it is the beginning of water in one stomach.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Apply the cautery to all veins and arteries that are left from the chain; and let the points be as long as the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And watch for bleeding during cautery; and if you see the patient's blood flow, stop temporarily with some medicine, which is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with knowledge on how to extract from arteries and remove those, as well as caution about bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Some times the neck is cautery-treated in such a way that two bones are placed with two points for subsequent production.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the stomachs are mild and through veins and arteries located manifestly on the head outside, and it is confirmed that this excess produces phlegm-producing mucus, then apply a cautery point with the one we have described in Chapter XII for beginning water treatment catching in the stomachs. Apply the cautery to the middle of the head and two points on the neck with two temples each, and two points on the neck with two bones each.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you are lacking in addition, then apply the cautery across the entire length of the stomach under the eyebrow at a small point.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On treating nasal odor with a cautery.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating it with what we have said in the previous section and does not improve your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nights of cod liver oil; and draw near to the head of the patient, and apply a mid-point olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And apply a thorn oil point with two points on the two eyebrows leaving some hair, and these should be small.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And take care not to ignite that artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is how the thorn oil cautery should be done.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On treating eyelid swelling from the stomach with a cautery.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is swollen due to illness or dampness, then apply a cautery point on this lunar cautery; and here is how it should be done for the patient:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do it, apply the cautery on both eyebrows a little with two points all around and let them be long like the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery depend on the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too much on the cautery, rather according to how hot the inner part of the eyelid becomes.
Capitol .xvi.	The Sixteenth Chapter
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the skin turns into parts inside and on the hand, and pain affects the eye and hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eye turns into parts inside, I puncture the eye; two ways to do a cautery are used for this: one is to apply a hot iron or use medicinal substances that burn.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If a cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient in front of this that they should feel their skin as if they were experiencing the removal of impurities by those who cleanse them, until they extend and equalize; and if you place your hand at its birth point, then strengthen the eyes of the patient under a covering so that it does not burn when their skin is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient in your seat, and in the vicinity touch the eyelid of the eyes with a sign, draw the mark which resembles a holly leaf figure, and make the starting point of the sign near the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place a cut in the belly or in pus from a boil on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply the heat of the cautery, which is this shape for it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And apply the cautery over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in patches visible, until the surface of the boil appears like a holly leaf entirely seemingly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of health in your work is when you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the skin of them rise above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and leave it there for three days, then place the cut over it with a border until the scab is formed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And care for that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If any cause returns for the skin near its birth and the eyelid is softened, then do another cut with the cautery on it exactly as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the skin is in the eyelid and remains there, then apply cautery to it until it rises to its natural place and equals, so that the skin does not pinch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If you use a burning cautery like this: command the patient to feel their skin until it extends and equals, then prepare a patch in the shape of a holly leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take soap known and an animal's fat. .1., Or do this, and then mix those causes well, doing it quickly so that it does not cool down; spread this over the paper which has been made in such a way as to resemble a holly leaf shape, place this on one or both eyes; place the eye under where you cut or both; place the eye with a cut made into almond fat under the head of the patient.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the same over the medicine and press it a little without burning so that the patient feels the taste of the medicine, which taste is in them as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the patient gets used to this burning taste, then take away the medicine and place it under your seat; thus when the burning stops, then reapply the medicine with water on the eye. And then consider if the eyelid has risen like when washed with fire or incision, which is now done here. If it does not return to that spot of the medicine on the place where no medicine was applied and does not get burned until your operation equals and the eyelid contracts.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And place the cut over it with a border until the soreness has been eradicated, and then care for that with anointing balm or another until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And for this you need to ensure during your operation that you maintain careful vigilance so that the medicine does not drip into the eye, and if the eyelid softens after a few days and any skin cause is near the eye, then apply your medicine to that spot on the eyelid which has softened, and do it in the same way as you started, and surround it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a holly leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that men's eyes vary according to size and smallness, so according to this you will perform your tightening.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let it not hide the path of rectitude towards that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	The Seventeenth Chapter
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the treatment of cautery for fistulas that occur in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we have discussed in the divisions of illnesses and do not apply your treatment, then follow this method for cautery: instruct the patient to place their head in their seat, and let one of their servants hold their head between your hands so that it is neither burned nor disturbed by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place the cut over almond fat or boil in the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And apply heat to the cautery, which has this shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be curved, as if it were the shape of a cane or a quill of a bird, with the heat applied from one end where the cautery is done.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be like when trying to do so.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, he who is humble is better for the work in this world.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if it's necessary to press the fistula when it's opened, extract and dry that part of him.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from him.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place over him the cautery which is made of fire, and hold your hand on this part of you until a little bit of the cautery touches the skin near the nose, so that your hand or the patient does not get upset, then stop the cautery in the flesh and clean it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus if during the start of your cautery it enters into the mouth, it is good; and otherwise, then reapply the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave that like this for three days, and place over that spot with a bandage around and inside it to keep the dry ointment in until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been more than ten days and is not healed, then place over the corrosive quick medicine inside where the bone is exposed, and scrape according to what suits in its caput.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method of applying a cautery to a fistula, which some early surgeons used: identify the location of the fistula and make an incision there, then place over that fissure a fine thread of which it is the form: And insert in that a quantity of one part of melted lead; and hold your hand on this with good control, so as not to disturb the patient lest the melted lead enter his nose; and cover where you pause above the nose of the patient like a fuse in albumen or water, allowing the lead to adhere to the location of the fistula and heal that through miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula has healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, it's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to administer a noseplugs and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to where its location suits.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On applying a cautery to a cut on the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Wounds that occur are cuts in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat those cuts as we have told in the sections and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small cautery with a knife according to this form that suits:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity follow the subtlety of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And place that initial cautery in those cuts where the cautery reaches into the root of the cuts.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with dressings until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On applying a cautery to a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the base of the teeth there's pus and you need to cut, and if it has burst and is old, and if you make a cut and then a fistula forms, and when you treat that without deepening the treatment, then prepare a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and place this ignited over the nose of the fistula, and hold your hand so as for the heat of the fire to reach its root, and do this once or twice at the end; and when treating it, follow what we have told about treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing is removed and it has healed, it's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to discover the location and expose the bone according to what suits in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On applying a cautery to teeth and softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are swollen, when you treat those with medicines and do not apply pressure, then hold the head of the patient in its place, and apply the cautery according to this form so as not to allow any deviation; and when you place the nozzle over the tooth, immediately insert the ignited cautery gently inside it, and hold your hand on this side such that the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And remove your hand, and then reapply the cautery several times according to how you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And let the patient moisten his mouth with salt water and hold that for an hour, then rinse it out, so that the swollen tooth is reduced, the gum softened, and the moisture dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On applying a cautery to tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness, or in it there is wax or infection, and if you do not treat the condition with medicine, then apply a cautery in that area according to two methods: either on the surface of oxen, or by fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Applying the cautery on the surface means you take an ox's hoof and heat it in iron until it is red-hot. Then hold that over the extremity of a torch, dip it into boiling water, and place it gently on the painful tooth so that it becomes cool.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then iterate that for several times so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, submerge wool or fat in the container above it, then place that over the painful tooth, and place the burning iron over it until the heat reaches to the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May however, the cautery with fire be that you wait for the smoke of wood or iron, and there is some hardness in his heart, and the heat of the fire does not reach to the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery to its shape which will come, place that on the tooth and hold your hand under the heat so it is cooled down; do this several times when the pain increases or in another day or the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And know that because of that heat from the cautery, which fills the patient's mouth with good warmth, leave that there for an hour and have them drink; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply heat as far as you see fit according to what's possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the tube:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of hernias with cautery.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by phlegm and cold fluids that do not respond to medicines, and you see a slight digestion of those, then heat the cautery according to this form, having two straight ends so that the smoke of the cautery can burn the other end, and place the burning instrument on that pustule once, and if needed do it again until it reaches the root of the pustule.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the pustule is small, then place the cautery according to the amount of the pustule, and apply it for three days and place wool or fat in a container filled with water until what has been burned by the fire becomes swollen.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment, lint, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the tube or the cautery should be as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the treatment of gout and constriction in veins.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the moisture enters the channel of the lung, especially when this is due to cold constitution, you should know that the patient needs to be relieved at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then apply heat on the source of the gallbladder in the area where it is compressed.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And remember that you should not let the heat reach the gallbladder nor burn a large part of the patient's neck, just a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply heat with another cautery on the joint at the top of the last rib of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the application of the cautery on his collarbone should be according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with what has been described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the treatment of lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moisture that does not have fever or inflammation, but is an old cough, then apply heat with two cauterizers on the sternum in the compressed areas of the thorax and stomach; and on another cauterizer in the middle of the chest between two breasts; and treat the collarbone with heat according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, use a puncturing method with the cauterizers which are called puncta, and this is their form as described in ear pain treatment.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points inside the cuts; and then treat that with what has been described until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And have the cautery have three levels for this treatment: you can do three cauterizations in one place according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the treatment of tinnitus that is the head of the auditory canal.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the auditory canal is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return in its usual time, you should correct its dislocation before it returns to its normal position, and by applying a slight movement it will also be corrected like we have demonstrated. Then know that initially reducing the dislocation, and then having the patient lie on their side or on their back; and then lift the neck which is at the start of the tinnitus, above the parts on top when your left hand fingers touch these areas, if the joint is dislocated inwards.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery with two tips; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then apply heat to the neck so that this heat penetrates into the other side; and here comes the figure of heat application as follows with four heated cautery tips:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it continues subtly according to the amount of heat; this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some operations are adjusted according to this count, and these are the cautery treatments.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And place over the cautery to add salt powder, and then have the patient lie down on their back, and let the body heal for some time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is on the upper part and the elbow is involved, then do this: apply a cautery over muscle at the elbow or with point cauteries, which confirm the joint and dry up moisture, making the patient well.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	About stomach cautery.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is irritation and moisture in the stomach that leads to expansion and multiplication of its contents, if you continue with the methods of treatment without curing it, then you will see that the patient is above reversing his position, extending their hands and things around them, and then apply a three-step cautery: in one step leave the feet as wide as the width of a single hand at the elbow cautery, and in two steps place the two sides of the body of the cautery, so that the triangular figure of the cautery appears; and extend those who are not properly positioned to create abrasion.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the amount of the two thirds of the thickness of the roughness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you like, apply large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape; this is a cautery according to the circular shape as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And have the stomach touched by punctures where this cautery scares: and you place points on the stomach according to the amount you want with heat, then apply a cautery at these points; and treat that with treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	About stomach cautery in fever.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When fever is accompanied by pain due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind that causes the patient's normal condition to be disturbed by excessive discharge, if the treatment we have described is followed without causing discomfort, then you will see that the patient is lying on their back with their head raised, and touches three cauteries according to this shape and amount above the fever across the flanks, allowing for the patient's position while lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the thumb, and make the cauteries according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And don't mix up your touch with the points at which you apply the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of this heat is equal to the thickness of the roughness of the chain, and is not properly adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if it is not standing, then they are lying down, which has already spread their things, and raises their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is how you should do the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is within your ability to perform these cauteries with the surgical knife when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo the cautery process, and ensure that the heat reaches everywhere in the chain so that it reaches every part of the body and spreads through the organs, as this chain is delicate; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	About making a puncture in fever with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When fever has inflammation or abscess and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the fever or on the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the fever, the patient feels heavy breathing and increased pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is on the skin of the fever, then the pain is intense and often that already fatigues doctors in treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So have the patient lie on their back; and place over the spot of the abscess with heat; and apply the cautery which resembles a rod, the shape of which was described in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply this cautery and the second one so that the entire chain is heated through, reaching to the liver, allowing for it to heal healthily.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with other wound healing treatments until it heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery other than the one studied in the art of medicine which is prolonged, and those with which you are familiar with many symptoms; however, experience some operations might burn over this procedure, but follow that advice, it will be better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	About stomach cautery.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient stomach cauteries performed on gashes were done according to this method and this is what you should take from the gashes of aristology: take a long sharp tool that can be found dry and long, which has the thickness of your thumb.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and apply this cautery at that spot between the continuation of the scapula and the collarbone; and with two small punctures on each side, one inclined towards the part behind where the beard is, and two more cauterizations below that, inclined downwards between the fifth rib and the navel, one slightly inclined towards the back parts; and another cautery in the middle of the chest; and another over the stomach, and three cauterizations at the back parts; and one cautery at that spot which is between the two shoulders, and two more on each side of the chest, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not think of touching your hand to the cautery, but rather observe the patient's condition as it is being performed.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they have said that some men who use iron cauterization simulating rays and fire do this by inserting it into the location between the ribs, where they reach from one to another pustule, as we described in the pustule of the leg.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	There is no reason for fear in this perforation with cautery; just as it often happens when you burn the location of the fistula where it does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Title: XXX
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the wound.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the foot disease as we have said about treatment in division and do not apply your own treatment, then when you cauterize it is done in three ways, all of which are diagonal. One method involves making three or four lines in a row according to the length of the wound following the pattern of the leg's cauterizations, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cauterization is the thickness of a finger or slightly less than that. The method of cauterization is the same method as the one we described in leg cauterizations equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not touch your hand to the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize; you light the cautery with two streams. This method we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the patient so that their weight is evenly distributed over their left foot when it is elevated perpendicular to the wound area.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And for your elevation, which is how you raise the body according to the length of the torso, so that cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both streams into the middle, ignite them, in that place where those penetrate the spine from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and so it is done by making four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a three-stream cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the wound from the cautery because it has had too much exposure to heat for too many days; more is considered better than the other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Title: XXI
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not in dropsy but specifically in swellings.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy as we have described in the division and do not apply your own treatment, then consider that you should cauterize with four cauterizations around the umbilicus and over the stomach, and another one on the leg, and another one on the foot, and two cauterizations between the ribs of the back, and a cauterization in the middle of the foot, and another one on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be roughly equal to the thickness of the spine.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the wound open up completely so that heat can reach for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And don't remove the patient from treatment near the cautery as you would for someone who has been treated with two medicines; and it should be well accompanied by healing assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery over which it is cauterized in the stomach should be similar to that of the one previously treated, and that over which the back is cauterized should be like an olive according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Title: XXXII
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of limbs and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with watery dropsy and are filled with saline water, consider that you should cauterize the feet above the back of the foot in such a way that it is between the auricular and annular bones; lift your hand to the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand and do not return it completely as the saline water dissolves.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The shape of the cautery is like this: Then make two cauterizations on each thigh, and for every object that you have made a cauterization, do it at the end of the surgical instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cauterizations according to the length of the thigh: leave one end and the other halfway on the thigh; and for each thigh, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the opened wound heal over a long period of time so that some water dissolves from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat with those causes which we have described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Title: XXXIII
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal cavities.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal cavity is affected by friction and dampness causing distension, these are digestive and retentive functions which reside in the stomach and intestines. It should be treated as described in the methods of treatment and not your own; sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization due to the disturbance of these functions, so you should cauterize this with a large cautery over its stomach according to what was described earlier in abdominal cavity cauterization, with the circumference of the stomach, and four cauterizations around the subtle umbilical area, with a small, subtle cautery; and one cauterization on the spleen above the larger lump or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you encounter excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize this over the navel and over the intestines, enhancing your adjustment of two cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin area; this is a complete cure for youth which you cannot go wrong with.
Capitol .xxxiv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Regarding the treatment of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in nature causing old hemorrhoids or one due to large humors or corrupted wetness, and they are cured as we have said in the division and do not give your cure, then apply three cauteries on the pus left on the two small and triangular lumbar areas, and after that cauterize on the navel spot for two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food they eat does not digest well, and their face has become flushed, then apply a large cautery as it was previously mentioned; and after that cauterize on the chest, and apply another cautery on the back, and use a needle-like cautery on the belly area, leave the cautery in place for some time, and soon afterwards treat internally until they recover.
Capitol .xxxv.	Section 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding the treatment of anthers near their absorption site.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove anther, then you ignite the cautery that is ready as a tool.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place the ignited tool within that anther near its absorption site, and continue using your hand until the heat of the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the disease flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, if there are many, then cauterize each according to what we have recounted, and after that treat those with your prescribed ointments until they recover.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you apply a large cautery on the buttocks, it will heal more quickly in young people.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Section 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas that occur naturally in various parts of the patient's body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the procedure we recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they will be cured by using a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when someone has a natural fistula in the buttocks, and it is old, full of pus that is both hot and corrupted moisture, then take that pus out with a thin tube, and after that know the depth of the area by using the tool mentioned before.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Place the cautery tool which resembles a ray for heating.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place the ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the depth in which the tube reaches.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that area with the cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned out. Do this once or twice or three times, according to your need's quantity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And protect yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula extends to the bladder or the intestine, then protect all those areas; and do this procedure only when the fistula is in a fleshly location and you consider it non-penetrative.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And after that treat the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed off, and all substances have been removed from it, but it still drains for a long time, then you can know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the substances are not from your body's own, then you can know that it is penetrating or in the beginning of your body's corruption, or it relates to those causes which will bring memory of themselves in that location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Section 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Regarding the treatment of sores.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in sores there is pain due to friction or by large wind, and the belly of the patient becomes pale, then take care to apply a cautery on those sores with a point-like cautery over each sore, using one that you have accustomed yourself to for recall.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strengthen the application of the cautery on a slight delay, so that three line-like cauteries will come in, and then they heal more quickly in young people.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Section 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Regarding the treatment of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and loss of moisture in the bladder due to friction and corruption such that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize it on the area with pus left above the bladder, starting where the skin meets the buttock, and apply one cautery on the right side part and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery according to the amount of pus; apply that with a cautery on the lowest part of both sides. Or use two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use needle-like cauteries as previously described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Section 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Regarding the treatment of the womb.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is friction and corruption in the womb, as well as prohibition for conception, and if her menstrual cycles are corrupted and delayed, causing abdominal pain, then you should have this area treated with three cauteries around the navel region; as we described in the treatment of the bladder. And place a cautery on the area above both sides or use two cauteries, using needle-like cauteries.
Capitol .xl.	Section 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the anus.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When corruption seeps into the area of the anus and causes reasons for its instability, a sign is that the buttock extends over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is found in their thigh joint.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should burn the patient's buttocks around the junction of the water exit, using a similar cautery. Because when you try this in the circuit of the junction as it turns out, and to prevent the junction from falling off, aim for the middle location of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And as per the shape described in the treatment for the stomach's cautery.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then use three olive wood cauteries instead.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in all the chain; and then treat that which is within until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the treatment for the sciatic vein cautery.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the junction of water, and it is due to cold and dampness causing swelling in the buttocks, the patient heals with what we have said earlier without consulting anyone else. If this is antiquated knowledge, then when you notice swelling caused by larger fluids in the buttocks, either with hot pills or artificial ones or similar; and then proceed to treat that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery in this case follows two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two known methods, of which one involves applying three triangular cauteries on that area over the width of the thigh; and then ensure they have good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And between each cautery is the size of the mentioned swellings, whether it's from olive wood or large cauteries.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Consider four cauteries on the middle area over the head of the anus for some red marks from the cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, burn around the circle described in the treatment for ankle dislocation, which is a circle containing and burning all the pain throughout the chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is confined to the ankle and does not extend into the leg.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the leg, then apply two cauteries on the leg at the location where you find pain in the buttocks; and one cautery on the groove for about four or five of the lateral parts.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it's a knife-like cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of pain in the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the swelling makes pain extend within the area near the ankles, then treat that area here with a cautery at three points or four or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the swelling causes pain to spread below the knee in the leg, then treat that area here with a knife-like cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And when treating with cautery, be careful not to use it until you burn nerves or large blood vessels, and due to this, there might be damage or contraction on the buttocks.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some who apply cautery to the groove and finish with it during the treatment, and the fire-filled bed causes the swelling in the foot, and burns through and corrupts all of the leg.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And something like that happens to the belly with strong vinegar solution, and because of this death occurs.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, treat each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say about ankle cautery that this is the method: make it like a circular iron ring where its circumference should be as long as one hand; and its hole according to the thickness of an almond or slightly more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle make another triangle; and the space between them is according to the size of your foot; those circles are made in two parts; and the length of those cuts is one toe or two toes, make grooves of iron appropriately corresponding to the circles; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And ignite it in the fire until it becomes red and starts to emit sparks, then place it on the ankle joint, with the buttocks over the calf area.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then apply three circular cauteries in one go to that area.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then smooth that area for three days; and cover the opened wound with bandages for too many days; and treat it with ointment until healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: or, children, from this type of cautery, we have used it due to the danger in examining them, and because of this, we have found those who examine them.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And for those who suffer from large cauteries on them, find that place on their body.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	And for those who apply burning medicines, make two perforated circles where the iron dust goes in. The length of their parts should be as long as two or more of your fingers.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each is according to the size of the mentioned swellings; leave them below and above, making sure they contain each other in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place the buttocks on the ankle joint while holding your hand over the ankle area; take hot water and pour it between the two circles, making sure its quality is with small fire gradually. Keep that for an hour's worth of heat, allowing the patient to endure the biting and adjustment—like being bitten by fire—until the biting stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand to the tool and wipe away all the water residue from the heated water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let it lie for three days and place it over that lump inside which the redness of the heated adjustment is intensified, and continue to do this for several more days. This lasts until your recovery; this happens later in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment inside which the healing occurs.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends within the thigh or leg, have them lie in the position where water is contained according to how it's done in equal water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of heated water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Mix equal parts of alkali and a white ash, then divide them into two. Place each part in a new vessel where the one you leave should be pierced with a small rod, according to how much fits into their rays.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Place the bottom of the vessel with another layer of boiling water, and add this living alkali and ash to it. Pour in enough cool water so that it covers your hand by a finger's width, and when you grasp those (ingredients) with your good compression, let the hot water from the cooling water drip onto the part left in the boiling water.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over fresh live ash and another new alkali. Then, this becomes intensely hot, which is administered in parts of medical operations and in the cautery of other limbs. This operation involves using fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And there are some medicines in which parts are heated, such as when the skin is burned, or with the use of melted wax and ash mixed together that need to be combined.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulia recounts an operation and treatment from the ancients for which water pain and sciatica nerve pain are cured, and praises this method greatly, saying that it requires no other treatment, and one recovers in one go as described, giving a person strength and health similar to that of another.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it's near to a hernia in the back, and if no vertebra is found, take some raw fig. And then divide this into several parts and place it in water where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and tie it up.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for the duration of three hours or until you notice any change in the condition of your recovery.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then rub it with oil until the patient's body becomes red, and then introduce heat from the sun, for when the pain ceases, they are healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Know that it is not appropriate to use cautery with these medicines but rather for the body's natural expulsion process.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May already Escorides taught that when there is a vein rupture in a goat, it is cauterized; the animal will heal faster. And do this with the cautery according to this method: take wool and dip it in old oil, then place it between the ribs and the back of the neck.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dried goat's horn and heat it with fire until charcoal is formed; and place the patient over the wool and leave them there until the charred part stretches out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, and don't stop until the sensation of the burn reaches into the water and rests on the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii. (This indicates the forty-second section or chapter.)
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the application of cautery for two types of pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in both parts are due to several causes, such as impact or percussion or excessive expulsion, and by similar causes, through infusion of wet and rough matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not used otherwise but in this single type which is done through the discharge of rough material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So know that you should evacuate from the patient using fitted pills and similar to them, which are made on both sides where there is pain for three lines according to the width of your body. For each line, if there's a sign in any case, do cautery or more, depending on the tolerance capacity of your body and its effectiveness.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform the cautery using point-shaped cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, you can do it with three or four points of the medial ligula according to this method:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii. (This indicates the forty-third section or chapter.)
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cautery at the onset of glibosis.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Some symptoms of this illness in small children lead to glibosis; and a sign that it begins in them is when you notice their structure becoming fluid, along with an increase in swelling and mobility.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find it at the end of the spinal column of the back and on the buttocks where it starts to rise above the other vertebral columns.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you do this and wish to stop it, then perform the cautery using a round-shaped cautery according to this method:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Let the cautery cover all parts of the vertebral column equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, perform the point-shaped cautery on the circuit of the vertebral column for two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And make the points in between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then treat the area so that it heals, using what we have said for water treatment.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Watch out that a cautery not be applied in gout caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the treatment of gouty pain and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that permeate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus how gout caused by rubbing with the hands is cured using a method of treatment and not leaving the pains unresolved, then they use cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you will apply the cautery near the evacuation in the circuit of the joint on the foot with hot points.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And an olive-shaped cautery, like this is what it looks like:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains climb into the joints or to other joints, and this is how they manifest, then apply the cautery on each joint with three or four points of this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that this kind of cautery is necessary for your use, then apply the cautery without pressing too hard with your hand on it before, just around the size of the vein.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains climb into both joints, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands, and it's called gout, then puncture along the lines as they twist around in the veins, puncturing on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if some of the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture on the circuit of veins over each knuckle and over the thumb.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains stay for days around the elbows or muscles, then apply the cautery to all parts of the aids.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not allow the patient to return to poor behavior and medicine intake, for if proper behavior and sweating occur with this cautery, then health will come about, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the treatment of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there's rupture in the veins and telling of hernias appearing before the intestine at its base, and this is how they begin to proceed, then you should instruct the patient to abstain from food for a day and use mild remedies so that the intestine can heal from its abdominal wound.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And proceed with the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to have their breath in that place where there is a wound or an appearance of hernia or intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And proceed to return that between your fingers and test the rupture over the bones of the knee, marking the extremity which is similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the olive-shaped cautery like this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	and let it burn with small sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the hernia or intestine to its original position and place your hand over the area to prevent further protrusion.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, one more on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand on the cautery straight, and insert that into where you find the bones of the knee in the middle of the thigh; repeat this process for another round if you have not succeeded in inserting it into the bone in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the movement of the hernia during your cautery treatment, do not forcefully push the hernia that might cause harm or other serious problems for the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, your operation would not be effective.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And consider that the size and measure of children's cauteries should be delicate according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And proceed to care for the area of the cautery for three days with bandages until the scab from the burn heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should be resting on their back for 40 days until the wound and the injury are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And consider that you should withhold nourishment for the patient according to the duration of their treatment, which stretches out their stomachs, and ensure the hernia does not protrude from the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And as it approaches 40 days, then administer medicine properly made and keep the patient for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And if they are reduced by work and overeating, and drink, and strong drinks, then when using this whole regimen of recovery, it will result in their healing.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will tell you the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, starting off, and it doesn't stop, then cauterize that rupture with an oval-shaped cautery according to its size, and let as much liquid be absorbed from the vein like half of its length; and treat it with what we have said before, and do not adjust further.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already tell some first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked for testing:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is held at the width in the middle part of the largest bulge above the rupture, and another line above; after that, place your hand on a point cautery, but the first cautery should be softer and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the treatment of applying a cautery to torsions or twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When discomfort or pain persists in some limbs due to a blow or impact and does not resolve with the usual treatments over a long period of time, it seems that using a pointed cautery might help.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And apply the points of the cautery according to the size and smallness of each member, its effectiveness and development, as well as the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if the first treatment with the cautery brings relief, it's good; otherwise, apply more cautery to the area; and usually, for such pains, puncture the affected body part with the cautery where you are near the patient, so that you can get those points of the cautery inside until the patient feels better.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the treatment of applying a cautery to leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosy patients undergo cautery treatments due to significant youth, and more so if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to apply cautery to that area, consider whether the leprosy is generalised and if it has been treated as we said in the section on treatment and not otherwise, nor here. You should be cautious about the patient's health because corruption could affect their entire body and all parts of them; so apply cautery at this point: one in the middle of the head, and another slightly behind it, place your forehead at the end of their hair; do this on both sides; also apply one at the back, over the neck or between the shoulders.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And conclude by holding your hand with the cautery for a while inside which initiates a small pressure in the mouth, and if their breaths are disrupted, to alleviate this; then apply the cautery on the flesh according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already widespread over the body and becomes clearly visible, it seems that you should apply these cautery treatments to this area as we've discussed for the head; then apply a cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each eyebrow, two on each shoulder blade, four on the ribs, one large near the pubis, one on the hip bone, two on each ankle, one on each ankle, two on each knee, and two on each muscle; also apply two at his heels. Apply cautery to all joints of these parts and feet, as well as on each of his ankles, and over each of his toes, and over the bony prominences of his body.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And watch out for the nerves that are above the heel so as not to burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some treatments involve applying a cautery on the bone of the heel and another in the mouth of the stomach, and another on the intestines.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more accurately you apply the cauteries, the better and faster they heal; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as you do with your nails, since their body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it seems that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as decided by the type of tools used.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat the cautery with tallow powder mixed with honey and the other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the treatment of applying a cautery to a state of stupor or numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is paralyzed or numb and treated with medicines, bandages, but still doesn't heal, then you should apply cautery to the paralyzed member using cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And make your cautery penetrate about a little bit into the base of the spine.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with an ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes, certain areas of numbness are treated with cautery that affects the limbs and feet, as well as the shoulder blades, you see the movement of the nerves affecting that member, and the numbness is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not apply this treatment without understanding the anatomy of limbs and the exit of all moving body's nerves, only those who are knowledgeable should do so.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the treatment of applying a cautery to those that turn white, indicating a condition or disease.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the whites are old and don't respond to any of the medicines or ointments, then you should apply a cautery to that area for a bit according to the size of the base where it is applied, until the whiteness and color return, and the color of the area changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat it with tallow and lentil powder mixed with roasted oil, and leaves of horseradish, or the fat from a pigeon or from an oyster, each ingredient is used in part, all are mixed together, then apply lard to one cloth and place it over the affected area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the treatment of applying a cautery to children.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want it to stop, then apply the cautery in a circular manner around that area along its circulatory path as it has moved.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be treated with a circular cautery around the middle spot; however, I do not see this way, for I fear it might be an ulcer, and I have seen this in some instances.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And the pustule should be treated by applying a circular cautery around its path as we have said, or with several spots of cautery.
Capitol .li.	End of chapter.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the treatment of boils through cautery.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a boil takes longer to mature, and this is due to an excess causing it, or because of the patient's old age leading to decline, with few symptoms, or through time, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then apply several small pointed cauteries around its path; and place what will speed up its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	Perhaps if you wish to perform the puncturing of it with a cautery, then you light the type of cautery like this: and place that in the middle of the boil so that the probe penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the heat from the cautery in that place reaches you, so that the arm's circulation is relieved; and then treat it internally until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	End of chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the treatment of corroding through cautery.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a spreading decay in a member, which eats away that area like fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if you see that corrosion in the place it affects with a fire, then you apply hot metal cauteries small and large according to what is suitable for that place where it corrodes.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply the cautery around completely so that you eradicate all corrosion without causing any harm to it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave that place for three days, and place your hand over the areas treated by cautery until all the scabs are eradicated and all the decay is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat that with meat healing ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Perhaps if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy in the place where there was decay, then yes; but if not, then apply the cautery over what is rotten in those corrupted areas again.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion can be treated with some doses of quick medicine, which is half in the place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the cautery with fire is a slight and rapid action.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment of it with quick medicine in the division, so take that when you have need for it from it.
Capitol .liii.	End of chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the treatment of warts and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Warts appear in various parts of the body that are called warts, and it's a large cause, entering in, which affects the skin; and treating them with a cautery is done in two ways, one being with fire and the other with boiling water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	To treat with fire, you ignite the cautery like a small coal, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart in every part, and it should have fine grooves.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that lit over the wart, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the wart until the cautery reaches the depth of the wart.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until you start to feel relief in the arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then cover that with bandages soaked in vinegar and salt, and leave the bandage over it for a night, once it has eradicated its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with meat healing ointment until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if they are non-convertible, and warts occur on the surface of the body, mainly in the armpits and the feet, then you should apply to those with cautery made of earth or iron or coal. And take one of these into a container; place that above the wart; and pour a small amount of boiling water into the container, stir your hand, and move it all over as if pressing on the edge of the container in the root of the wart, and let the boiling water flow through the exit point of the root of the cautery. And wait for the patient to chew on the boiling water for an hour, then remove that; once the wart has eroded its roots, it will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this with these and repeat it for all of them until you have applied it to every single one in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those pustules that have been eradicated by this method, using ointments for the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	End of chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the treatment of tremors through cautery.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When experiencing one or more tremors due to rubbing on the nerves or from fever caused by rubbing, or due to another similar cause, you should apply four cauteries or five of them on the ribs of the back, between each rib with a single cautery; and on the feet, over the stomach, apply an olive-cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremors of you will subside, and hasten the recovery of your illness by rubbing.
Capitol .lv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding cautery for heart injuries.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are boils, and pus-filled wounds that are made from thick, rotten substances; therefore when it comes to treatment at their appearance, it should be treated with cautery over the entire head of the fistula using a fine-pointed cautery under the tip of a rod; or a long resectoscope; or a slow-conical cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some ulcers are cauterized upon the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they do not harden and it breaks down the excess, making those heal.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be that this is done near blood evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	End of the sixth chapter.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Regarding cautery for bleeding from a surgical wound due to an artery incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many ulcers where there is bleeding from an artery that needs to be drained, you should drain the wound itself or make a puncture in the abscesses or the member's cautery, and then resembling it, it becomes difficult to maintain that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when it comes to such a thing, you hold your hand over the artery's opening and place your finger there, press down on those particular ulcers inside so that stops the blood flow of the wound, letting your finger there and not let it escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place over the fire for the olive cauteries small and large, by number of points, and exhale over those into which there are flames.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take from those a small or large one according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein promptly once you've maintained your finger there, and apply cautery into which it will be cut off and contained that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the artery's opening when you maintain your finger there and remove the cautery, then take another finely applied olive cautery which are prepared in fire, and therefore do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is contained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And watch that you don't burn the nerves here, and that it brings about other mischief to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it's not possible to restrict the blood in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four ways: or use this kind of cautery we have mentioned, or extraction if it cannot be removed, for when it can be removed its ends are burned and the blood flow is contained; or be tied by wax or thread due to strong constriction, or placed on the patient using medicines whose virtue restricts the blood; and strengthened with powder in a decent constricting.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Let that person who administers decent constriction to the patient use thread and pressure with cloths or due to causes of burning effects and appearances, not apply anything but tar.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this must be done and the doctor or medicine is not present, then open as we have indicated over the opening of that vein in such a way as we have said, and understand to apply a very tight constriction to it within which the blood should stop from most parts of the wound, and above the artery do not maintain your finger; and over the artery be rubbed with cold water for a long time until the blood coagulates and thickens; and consider when it is necessary to use cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding incisions, punctures, wounds, and bloodletting as well as their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words by Albuqarıq.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already mentioned in the first chapter all illnesses where fire cautery is suitable and with burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, as well as the tools necessary for those cases, I have organized the chapters on the body's condition within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	I proceed in this chapter for that same purpose, so to alleviate what the one asking wants, then about what they have requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I start this, listen carefully, that in this chapter it's about what was in the first chapter regarding cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because of that, you should be very cautious, which in this operation involves draining ulcers where it has blood in which life depends on the application of medicine to the vein or incision over the abscess or opening for discharge or cleaning of the wound, or extraction of a needle or incision of pus and their appearances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all those there are accompanied fear and trembling, and in the most extreme case, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that don't fall into situations where there are deaths, for some ulcers require methods of men and various types of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And there's some that will die from their illness and it's a light one for them, and also due to the intensity of what they find with their illness, and because of the duration of their illness, fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And those are the ones that give you their concern and statement, you expect for that health, and their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore don't agree to what someone comes to you about in this manner; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite; and do not presume any cause on this without certainty of knowledge that verifies what you believe, and from which it can derive a reasonable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	In the treatment of all your sick patients, predict and indicate for each their recovery, where in that is assistance to you concerning acquisition of fame and memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, may God listen to your understanding and not impose direction and protection upon you, as is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to the chapter of cauterization, concerning the treatment of head wounds among feet, so that what you request from this and of which you need is made clear to you.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Concerning the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this sickness, which appears in children's heads during infancy, strengthens the head of the child as it grows.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some bumps appear due to unknown causes, which are not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this sickness in anyone other than children; and for all those I have seen dying from it, it seems like a left-over task on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and the size of their head was always magnificently maintained within which it could not bear to be put because of the size of its head; moreover, than moisture increased within which became death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the bone and the skull, or accumulates from outside onto the head.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation is in that place where moisture is between the bone and the skull, and pus is little, then you have to make an incision in the middle of the head with a crack in the width, and let the length of the crack be two inches so that the moisture flows out. This is the way for the operation:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and pus is greater, then these are two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is outside of the skull, its sign is that you open all the corners of the head from every side, and when you press that water in your own hand on the parts inside, it doesn't remain hidden like this.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And when you make an incision in the middle of the head according to this manner, with three cracks:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And at the site of the incision, extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the cracks with bandages and feathers; and on the fifth day apply grease from above and oil to that area. Then remove the wound dressing and care for the wound with lint and ointment, and strengthen the head with equal consistency; and feed the patient with dry food of low humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And it is another method for making an incision that takes into account the size of the pus pocket and the accumulation of water. Some bumps may be more in the back of the head (occipital area), or on the front side, or to the right, or to the left; therefore, pay attention to where the pus pocket and the water accumulation appear, and make your incision according to what is best for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not cut the artery and let the veins flow with the blood of the patient, so when you have a flow of blood, there is an evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Second Chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Concerning the incision of arteries which are near the ears, they are referred to as 'whitewash' (possibly an error in translation).
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an issue with catarrh or inflammation in the throat or chest, and you are not accustomed to treating this through medicine, then the final cure for these two arteries lies in making this incision.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you wish to make an incision where the patient elevates their head and is able to see their own head, then prepare the area with rough cloth so that you can see the arteries, and strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider on which pulse the vein lies; and press these areas over those close to the ears, as they are often hidden in certain individuals.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then pinch on the artery to try, and then pierce each one in the center of the acute part's edge as it approaches into the bone, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert your needle near the artery and twist it as it hits the divisions above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two digits adjusted, for when any vein is cut, a sensation will occur during pulse ejection, which beats irregularly, jumping frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery doesn't appear at the pulse point, then gauge that you measure from the elbow the quantity of space as three digits, and then pinch on the artery, and puncture it into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what concerns the sensation is the amount of blood withdrawn, and adjust the force of what you take from him or her, and all this is according to the amount that appears from the virtue of the thigh and the filling of the artery above.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of infection above the bone, then cut that away so as not to produce an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with needles and with strips of linen, and then treat that with oil until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Title: III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	About the removal of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When something related to this causes old headaches or sharp pains, due to dampness and through quality of those in the temples, or when it is an old headache that resembles them, and you treat with medical healing methods, then if these do not work, we focus on these illnesses: removal of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and removal of those arteries is that you lift up the skin which is in the temples; find the obvious artery on the temple as shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in few people due to the intensity of heat.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it's hidden from you, then strengthen the back of the thigh with some cloth; and then rub that spot with a hard cloth or boil the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the needle which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you burn the string at that spot while facilitating its passage until it reaches the artery; and then drain oil on him and remove it from the surface areas as you remove that from the string and uncover those of the tunics beneath, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is subtle, then wrap that around the tip of the onion, and then cut a part from it according to the length by which its tips are extended and contracted, and do not produce a sensation, for if they are not cut there will be no pulse from all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate of blood, some. Into three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then take that in two places with double strength on each or with cords long, and do not cut towards its putrefaction before the healing of the wound occurs, to avoid a sensation.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut out the surplus that is between two cords; do this either in that moment or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a surgical knife until its extremities are incised, and remain in place of that half-done work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it's better if the thigh has fever or is from a cold constitution; for cautery relates to those causes that aid in final dampness, and thus it's better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And the removal of arteries that you make at an old spot is better, and they should be placed on your pulse in decently made powder, and then it should be treated with dry medicines until the flesh emerges and within which it becomes healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you work on another wound, it happens that there is blood flow from the artery, then you should constrict that pulse, or with a cautery, or what fills the spot of the pulse, and hold your hand until the pulse is constrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes is not present to you at the site, then hold your finger on that spot until the pulse is cooled down, and cover that area with water from strong coldness until the heat subsides, and strengthen as you see fit.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is pusier in the removal of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two needles, for you have touched both spots on the needle, and then heat fire until they reach the bone, cut off the vein in two places, so as to extend what is between its extremities, which are not completely hardened by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the heat of the two needles is instantaneous.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of the two needles is better with two needles each, for they approach to any needle at high speed and do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	When there is some lump in those cases, heat from the fire is applied to those areas and the flesh is slightly removed.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this technique improves all work and even the slightest one.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And those are the spaces between two ribs, the amount of pregnancy in the mentioned case.
Capitol quart.	Head quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of illnesses caused by sharp and acidic tears from the lungs.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and it's the illness of those veins which are above the nose in the forehead, and no reason for the treatment of medicine exists here, often the face of the patient becomes red and walks around their front space as if it were a space for ants to walk. The lungs are exhausted, moistened so that their skin has become known, and their eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of tears. The old ones were irritated in treating those illnesses with this operation, and many people find this treatment unpleasant.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to scrape off the skin which is on their forehead, and then you make three equally spaced incisions on the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two inches: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly less than the movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the veins which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space for each incision is three inches adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth, use it to wipe off the sweat.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then place the tip of two sharp ends together, this is the form of the incision for them:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which goes from the point where it enters to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Gently remove all the chain that is between two incisions near the cheekbone which is above the eye, and then do this for the incision moving into the second one.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then separate this tip and insert another tool in the first incision; it's called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause at the sharp part you should remove the surrounding flesh and chain, and at the other side inside the bone, insert that to reach the incision moving inwards. Then carefully remove all the veins that descend from the head to the lungs.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Make sure the incision continues up to that opening of the chain and then do this inside the space between the other incisions.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And once the amount of sweat has drained equally, squeeze the areas under the collected sweat.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then pause at each incision with an old cloth, and place those powders of wine on them. Apply that mixture of wine and oil to these areas without forming any abscesses.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, rinse off with boiled water or sweat water, and then treat this with anointing balm and oil mixed inside where the sores have been healed.
Capitol .v.	The second part.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Regarding the treatment of tears by catarrh and the lungs descending from the divisions inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When touching an inflamed vein and continuing this way, and often the lungs of the patient are weakened by coughing, and their examination becomes distorted; their eyelids are ulcerated, and their skin is discolored. In the front part of the head there is acute pain with sharpness followed by exhaustion, thus you should know these situations where the materials and catarrh do not come from veins of divisions occurring inside.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment in such cases is this: you command the patient to rub their forehead, and then make an incision near the center of the forehead, a little bit across (and start from the incision of the left temple towards the right; and let the incision go into the bone; and extend your hand past the muscles where the temples are under, up to jaw movement), so that there's exposure of the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Squeeze all the sweat with sponge or on dry cloth and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And apply that mixture of powdered wine and oil on top in order to avoid forming abscesses.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you've drained this and as the abscess has diminished, then prepare to rub inside the bone starting from their nose flesh, and then treat that with regenerative drying which makes flesh regenerate, just like if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of honeycomb and mix them together, and make a paste from it and apply it in these sores as for the flesh's origin.
Capitol .vi.	The sixth section.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Regarding the treatment of that which inflames in the earlobes.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes of inflammation in the earlobes are four kinds; one is from mineral rock or causes similar to rock like iron and lead, another is from plant such as garlic or fava beans, it's also from something that can cause leakage like water and oily mixtures, they resemble each other, or some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when phlegm is found in the ear or another similar cause of those causes that don't adjust well within the ear, place the ear to the sun's heat, and if you see the phlegm, then distill it with some cause of oil violation or sulfur, and administer the extraction from it, and make them sneeze according to their condition, and hold their noses until the sneezing event occurs.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool near the circuit of the ear, and spread the ear to its parts, which when heated becomes accustomed to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not heated, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called epicyclic gentle gesture extraction, which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is accustomed to the gesture, that's good; otherwise, then administer the extraction of it with a delicate spoon made from wood with two additions.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not accustomed to this, then make a tube of reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the area of the tube with wax and with soft oiled substance, so that it does not open except for the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract through strong suction at your nostril, which increases the pressure like what we have described previously.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	And if it is not accustomed to this method, then take some chalk or charcoal powder and apply it with a brush so that you can catch the wax in small quantities, place that on the tip of your nose, and then properly wrap around that cotton.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal for easy access, and then remove the wax from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not accustomed to all the causes we have recounted, then you should prepare to cut that out in front of where an abscess or spasm will develop.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting that out is as follows: at the beginning, you touch the base of the cephalic vein and extract according to its virtue, then prepare by making a cut between your hands and turn the ear towards its parts. Create a small crack in the canal of the ear and press the wax against the place where it has been pinched off.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack forms into a lunar figure and reaches the phlegm, once you have obtained it with appropriate tools; and then while in that position, treat quickly within where it becomes healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause that enters the ear is one of those fats that grow and swell up inside it, then administer treatment and extraction for it; but if you do not adhere to your commitment, then take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And use that spatula to remove the fat lump which is inside the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not remove it as soon as you think that this area is moistened by the ear vapor, place it on small pieces and then carefully extract from those areas through the nostrils or with a subtle gesture method, or use the tool we described which makes extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	And in the water that enters into the ear cavity, make the patient sneeze according to their condition from the beginning, fill the patient's ear with a bit of old cotton, and pour over that part of the ear where the water is. If it becomes accustomed to this method, then it's good; otherwise, take small teary and leon-like substances according to the length of what we described, heat those briefly in fire, let the patient insert one of those into their nasal passage and rest on a piece of that part while hitting another pebble against the phlegm inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So continue this process until all the water is accustomed to being inside.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water becomes accustomed in that way, take paper or a needle and thread, etc., and place one end of it in the ear canal, extending the other end into fire until its tip burns.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another needle and do this process several times until all the water becomes accustomed, then extract that with a tube as described previously for removing phlegm.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	And in the extraction of beast entering that ear canal, if it's small and similar to it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it's a large cause that appears deep within movement, then administer its extraction through gestures and with care, and this cause is easier than all other causes that occur inside the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	And in the extraction of worms that are produced inside the ear, when you treat it with what we said in the division and in the tract about distillations, but your treatment is not effective, then consider looking at the ear under sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if here appears any worm-related cause, then remove it through gestures or with delicate spoons; but if there's no reason to appear, then take a tube stretched out and wide which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate end into the ear according to the amount that can withstand the pain; and suck vigorously through suction, while doing this process several times, until all worms are accustomed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not adhere to your commitment, then seal and cover around the tube circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared for worm treatment, and find this process in the tract about distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your application be such that you pour the medicinal oils into the auricular artery through this tool with which this is its shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or amber, leave it straight, in which there's a small notch, and have a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so let it be that what is in the cavity of the canal here where it's necessary will be performed.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap it around the end of their descent, and then pour oil into the cavity of the concha, or juice from any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the canal - that one is in the ear - , and then place the rod on top of the herb and squeeze it with your hand at a moderate pressure so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the concha and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is inserted in the ear should already be heated by fire for a little time.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that when you distil in the ear it should not be too hot, because the remedies of the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of perforations in the ear.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children have small punctures in their mothers' unperforated abdomens, and this happens sometimes in adults too, perforation in the meat of the ear due to a splinter or a piece of flesh from that area; and some of these perforations are made in the front part of the ear canal which does not sense the touch, and others are outside the parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that one that happens in its front part, which does not sense touch, is in the more difficult situations for treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one where you can sense touch, consider to hold the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is an obvious perforation, open that with a fine spoon which has this shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where there is a small width, where one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spoon should have two sides that are long for not harming the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the perforation is through flesh inside the ear or in its meat, then you have that with thin needles and puncture it vigorously so that all the flesh is pierced.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the perforation is in the front of the ear, then take a fine long rod and heat that with fire for a little, and place it inside the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have sensed that the patient feels relief, by listening to sound, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and remember not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place earband on the ear according to the size of the thickness of that which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take any kind and press it into water and grind it over the dried substance, using it; and if the ear has already healed, then consider to destroy that one and replace it with another kind which you wrap in a bandage made from roasted oil, within which the pustule should subside; and treat that until it is cured.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If it happens that there is discharge of pus, then immerse a sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear, and apply another remedy which restricts the pus discharge, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of adhesions that occur between the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Eyelid adhesions that occur between the eyelashes in some cases are moistened, and in other cases they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Consider that you have to separate those with tweezers or with needles, and split the adhesions from their roots using thin needles, and then place them over the affected areas after they are dried.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain with pus discharge, then you apply a cautery to those with fine tubercle cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is near the incisions and many pus discharges return when there remains any cause of those roots; and when they are applied with fire, those roots are burned and do not recur.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for the swelling that occurs in the eyelashes of children.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swelling cases that occur in the eyelashes of children is caused by something which gathers as swelling in its strength and hardness, and because of this swelling it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it's an accumulation of large moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So the operation in them is that you should consider if the swelling is proceeding from within it, i.e., coming out of the eyelid and being swollen to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make incisions across it according to the width, and then drain it from all parts with ease until it drains, and then suspend that with needles and remove that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If it does not appear that the incision is done of it if not pus that penetrates through the eyelid with small and gradual incisions, then this will be noted in no cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the appearance is large, then you adjust it with suture; and treat that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it's only slight, you won't encounter much difficulty since the discomfort of the patient restores that and brings relief.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is large, it decreases in the parts inside the eyelid, then flatten that eyelid and suspend the swelling on a string, another you choose from beginning, press that with all sides; if the eyelid begins to stretch, this will be noticed under no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with water that brings relief until it heals.
Capitol .x.	End of chapter or section.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Regarding the treatment for inflammation in the area above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is yellow mucus that's produced in the membranes above the eye, especially affecting children, it intensifies their eye infections and damages their sight; they can't look at the sunlight because their tears congeal on them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And you should have them speak about these things constantly on their foreheads all the time, and sleep with them on their foreheads; and allow their eyelashes to become wet from sweat, which already covers inflammation, and the imminent formation of pus is evident in the eyes; and when you press the area with your fingertips, you feel a hardening within those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a surgical method in this where the patient rests their head on your shoulder, then place a cloth over them and apply heat. Create a circle according to how much pus from all parts contains, then press that onto the patient's back so that pus accumulates inside the circle. Then create an opening at the center of that moisture parallel to its width, ensuring it isn't larger than the incision made in a phlegmon.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	You should make the incision all the way through until you reach the pus, which after the largest positions, you process pus through a cut according to the form of white fat.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So, extract those with the cloths that you enveloped between your fingertips from the outward parts, and stir them with your right and left hands until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to place it in the cut so that on the surface, it doesn't reach the eye and avoid letting it down there.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you don't find pus in the beginning of the cut, then place something small in the cut so that it can process pus; and also extract as we said. And apply cloths soaked with water, vinegar, and press them on the area, strengthening those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And similarly, they spread salt and let it sit in the cavity of the cut, as that which is wiped off from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess appears in the area, then treat it with plaster bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	End of chapter or section xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Regarding methods for touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes, these are natural hairs and so ancient, then they touch the eye causing ways of eye diseases like excessive tears, swelling of the eyelids and the inner tissue where this causes damage to the eye leading to a condition called ophthalmia or inflammation of the eye. Treatment is done in four ways: either with a hot cautery; or with acute medicine as mentioned in the section on cauteries; or it's treated by cutting and suturing; or through canals as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore when you place the head of the patient on your shoulder; then convert the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it's converted, then it's good; elsewise, insert a needle in that where pus remains inside the eyelid, and make the needle pierce through it above, and so - near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born - near the hair, pull the thread from the upward parts to the eyelid, then convert it into redness.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And further make an incision inside the eyelid so that these hairs align with the tears falling from the main lacrimal duct to the lacrimal sac; then extract the needle and apply a small amount of cypress or cloth powder on the eyelid, then place it on the eyelid as if in a thyme leaf shape.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But indeed when making the shape according to the quantity of eyelid deflation which varies in humans, those who need for a large quantity of it depending on how much the eyelid becomes swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And further apply the paste over the two lines which you've marked out, starting from the main lacrimal duct to the smaller lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your cut is near the natural hairs like it's wide as a king's.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And further insert the string in one of the two corners of the cut, then scrape it all over, and adjust to the stitching both lips with thread or thin wool, clean off the wax, and adhere what's superfluous from the threads onto two eyelashes due to certain causes that irritate them, if you want to do this, otherwise don't treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And further let the thread stitch of the threads rest for three or four days, then treat that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the wound to heal naturally, and treat it with what dries and tightens, for when the eyelid is lifted, you should seal the wound and add something to it; better suturing is more important. So do this according to the ancient techniques of medicine.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in such situations concerning the patient's leg, it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to consider it, which involves placing a figure on the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, and then lifting the eyelid by three threads separated and grouped according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, hold the threads, and if this does not match, then take a needle with thread attached and insert that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal point, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal point. Adjust between your fingers the threads equally, and lift your hand up to the same height as the elevation you are performing; raise the entire chain on which it is laid just like we have instructed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two wound edges for suturing, and heal that inside which needs to be healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If it happens that you have an abscess, stop your incision or your cut, but treat that abscess with dressings and make them look alike, and apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes on the eyelid that their hairs are transformed, then take care to use in that what we have said about incision; better suturing is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Medicine for canes (or dogs) follows this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it involves converting the eyelid and dividing the figure inside as I have recounted; then, using art, create two canes or two fine wires of which their length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is about the width of the nose.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And place anything of subtlety under what you have superfluous on the eyelid of the dog, and tighten the wires at the ends of each part firmly, then leave it for a few days, when the chain by the tension will die down and be rejected, and settle so that by itself it will fall.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then cut at the loops, and then heal the wound that needs to be healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then, when it has hardened, the eyelid will rise and the hairs will not pinch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canes that you should follow in this manner:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And have the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On elevating irritating hairs in the dog when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and sharp, causing irritation in the dog, then the operation is that you take a subtle needle and insert it into this fine thread like a needle and a lion's claw, and adjust the ends of it in such a delicate manner that each one stands alone.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be about the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you create another subtle thread from what is left of yours quickly, and if you want, use the ends of that one.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the dog's head in your own hand, and place it close to the sun so that your work may be seen, for this is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the adjusted hair where it needs to be made, and let that penetrate into the eyelid smoothly while you remove that above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair inside and insert it into the others, and let there be one or two or three hairs at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand inside where the hair has been removed by rubbing on the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is rubbed off and not cut the hair, you will rub off to the parts left with the thread that you have made in this manner, where there is rubbed off hair from the trace above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then take that away from the dog's vision, when you will rub off and the thread, cut the dog's hair, and let it rest for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows back good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter than normal, then adjust a long hair of the natural ones, and elevate it towards that, or leave it so that it grows slightly in some space, and then elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On treating excoriation which occurs above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When excoriation appears in the dog, which is the contraction of the eyelid when it tightens in its parts, or on the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds, bleeding, or cauterization, and it is called leporine. This excoriation can be natural or accidental, occurring from the tightening up due to the healing of wounds, bleeding, or cauterization, or resembling its maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation in such cases is that you cut through that contraction and separate its edges from it. Place a piece of linen bandage where there's space between those parts, then sew them together when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not overlook the use of treatment for the causes that dry out, restrain; because if you do this, it will return to a worse state than before any time had passed.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of the causes that soothe such as fenugreek, and steep them in water above which they float for a while or in butter oil, which when liquefied with any of the oils, immerse your body in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you puncture through all parts that are not consolidated according to their original form at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation, which we are referring to, is merely a correction of the disease that does not return the form of the site according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIIIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of gout which is done in the eyelid, you must.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This gout which occurs in the eyelid, you must treat; it is called spontaneous gout and has both a natural origin and an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental gout comes from wounds, cuts, cautery or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for the operation is: take a needle with two-fold thread, insert it into the flesh and guide it from the left tear duct into the right one, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh towards its divisions on the needle and hold that to the needle, and incise with a broad space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the eyelid returns to its original shape as desired, it is good; otherwise, take the thread and hold it in the cut area, then reshape the eyelid with that, and make both cuts on the side of the eyelid as you wish.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two cuts be at the corners of the incision you made in between them, and form an angle from there when they come together, making their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this shape is Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And remove that flesh for the amount that corresponds to half of your patient's sharpness, so as not to damage the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the separated parts, sewing them with wool thread; and cure those with the medicines that we have mentioned for soothing treatments and in baths so as to heal.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if gout is caused by a cut or suture or cautery, you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as it was done beforehand.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And remove with the bath between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the total discussion of gout treatment when it's about the left or right side, it should flow in your operation according to the shape of gout, and that shape is like a variety of spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare parts in every manner possible that could fit inside to make the figure return to its natural form or close to it, and this patient according to what suits them from the operation and tools within their best arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this hardening occurs in many men, it means that the eyelid is solidly stuck above on the white of the eye, and prevents ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you must insert the end of your finger under the eyelid and lift it up or extend it to the elbow.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And you should incise the adhesion with a subtle cut, which is not at the sharpness of the incisions, having slightly blunt so that the patient does not worry about the operation, and leave the cut without damaging the eye's sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision carefully remove that adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and heals all the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should immerse your eye in salty water, or distill it from juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a bath for him, place on the eye ointment soaked in the egg white, and daily use causes that promote healing until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On incision of the eyelashes and the elevation of flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that an eyelash can occur in two ways, either nervously which resembles a hard fine ciphac; or non-nervous, resembling thickened white moisture. When you touch it, if the patient wants to pluck it at the root, it is removed and the root does not stay in them.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types do not start from the major tear duct but gradually spread into covering the view and prohibiting light and eye movements.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to act in an incision is that the patient holds their head where they are, and then opens their eyes, lifts the eyelid with your hand, and carefully grasp the eyelash at its root and extend it towards the divisions above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert a horse hair or a cow's hide or a sheep's skin, or similar, or gradually double the end of the needle until it is placed in the middle of the eyelash, penetrate that with the needle, tie it at the end of the eyelash; extend that towards the divisions above, scrape off the tip of the eyelash which cuts the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus follow that towards the skin inside the abdomen of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or with small scissors, and cuts out the skin of the natural lacrimal membrane so that due to it, continuous flows of tears do not occur.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some claws in the sun or on the finger, as we have said, then it is to be excised with a small spatula which has this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And remember not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula and that there is no rupture in it, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision makes in the wound a little bit of salt or vinegar made from wine seeps out, and leaves that inside another day; and care for that where it covers should be healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the claw is not nerve-like and you can't insert the needle, or it's not attached to that big finger, then this kind of claw will be cured with medicines, and treated like I've recommended in the section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut that, then open the space of the thigh and take out a small, sharp spatula according to this form:
am subtilitat.	In subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you notice that it is thinned and mixed in that duct, then distill from your mouth with vinegar wine or with vinegar or finely ground salt into the opening of the tear duct, and pour the opening inside the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And iterate over that the operation until it removes all that belongs to you, otherwise let pus form in the opening which then you leave, and start treating the abscess when it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The removal of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the wound due to great damage, should be suspended on the finger; and cut out a part from it, and do not finish the incision so as not to cut off flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And after that, distill in the lacrimal vinegar and make it with vinegar until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of alveoli and what is born from tightened flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some ulcers in the alveoli of some people produce hardened flesh, and is over-covered until it covers the pupil, or gets closer or tightens near the eyelids and fortifies the eyelids against the parts forward and it is assembled to touch the edge of the palate.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on it is that the thigh rests its head in your place; and then open the ulcers of that and collect all that flesh with convenient scissors to water, and hold the water with a pair of forceps or tongs; and cut out the flesh starting from there until everything is finished at the incisors, and watch over the wound so that you don't let go of that, which should be your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be like the one where you cut those or with that spatula which we recommended in the operation of the claw, or with small scissors according to what will come up to this chapter's form.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your operation is completed and that flesh has been removed entirely, then fill the wound with salt, or distill into it vinegar powder resembling those of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound outwardly a slice of raw egg until pus formation is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any disease of the alveoli and it is covered by pus, and you fear pus formation, then leave the wound and treat that pus with water where pus decreases, and after that continue your operation until it heals, and similarly do for the flesh which happens in this kind's wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you should ensure that all healing of the wound through natural or accidental means operates through iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member suffers this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On collecting wax in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Wax is those stubborn veins which are on the wound and forbid its operation, and cleanse the wound longitudinally over days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which wax exists is strong and there is no other ailment than wax, then you collect that wax.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the thigh to rest its head in your place, and lift those veins onto a finger or two according to your judgement; and let that one finger have a subtle duplication as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or gradually over two fingers like this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be collected with fine forceps, with subtlety, and remove the pus little by little as you see those veins being removed from the wound and turned inside out.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And remember not to lead the wound towards the tips of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day facing the sun, be firm with your operation so as not to cut any other veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the wound vinegar or vinegar by which its acuteness corrodes that which has been removed from the wax.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to gather all in that hour, then you apply a plaster over the area that relieves your pain, and let him rest for several days until his pain subsides and the abscess heals.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And gently continue to treat him according to the mother's method until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is how it looks like a scythe:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol. Nineteenth.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Reduction of inguinal hernia to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with a cautery or with hot penetrating medicine, according to the description of their symptoms and they are not getting better, then it is not in him but rather cut above the abscess you wait for its maturation, and you extract all the moisture which is in him until his bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is discovered and there is corruption or blackness in his body, then you treat him with a mustard that looks like this:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called hard hat, made of iron and shaped like a nail, with the head rounded thus like a thorn which is made perforated by the tip of a chisel or finely bored (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that over the corrupted area of the bone, and then roll it between your fingers, gently pressing your hand little by little until you know that this corruption is flat.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And with it make some incisions, and then restore the area from causes of drying and constricting.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the area is consolidated and it has good flesh in his navel, and it removes the body of the disease for forty days, and it does not renew and there is no abscess formation and nothing happens to him by accident, then you will know that he is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then it is not in his belly but reducing the crack to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and you reveal from the bone on either side with iron or with acute medicine, and when the bone is revealed, then you take out a tool according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The end of the iron is triangular, and the shaft of the tool extends into the tip thus as seen here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that on the bone, and that should be close to the nasal bone; extend your hand just a little bit beyond his nose, and then rotate your hand with the tool until it penetrates all the bone, and he feels the patient when you take hold of his hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the area with medicines that dry and constrict in this way, as you have seen fit.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	So when the flesh and the area are hardened, then that matter which flowed to the far parts returns to the nose, so this is just pus on the patient's chest.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol. Twenty.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Reduction of the prominence of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose protrudes to its entirety and does not occur in the reddening of damage or diminishment, then bend that back, and follow it up, and place gauze on his neck for scraping with good scraping; and then place over the nose a liniment made of garlic and aloe vera and honey and lard, and place a plaster bandage over the nose with powdered dough.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for powders is that you take linen cloths, each cloth to be divided into four pieces; and make them from those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one on top of the other according to the amount that his nose needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen them with a thick bandage; and place the suction cups for scraping on his body; and leave the suction cups in place and straighten his nose during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	And if while the ligament is being softened, then bend it that way well.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then hold the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the nose has already been reduced, then that's good, but if not, then continue with the plaster and powders and bandage and suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol. Twenty-one.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Reduction of the prominence of the inner coat of the eye.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the inner coat of the eye, and then it protrudes outward like a grain of sand, and its form resembles that of a human being for this reason, and you want to remove it, then the operation on him is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the slit of the choroid at the part left in the part above, and then put the needle inside another containing a double thread of the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate and guide the first needle according to its position; and then cut the place of the double thread and remove that part of the choroid from the hole made by the needle, and strengthen that with bandage.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle, cover his head with wool soaked in hen's egg white and wait until the thread falls into the eye.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat his nose with water that makes him comfortable until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And make several incisions around the entire circumference of linen bandage on his nose at its prominence large, and then puncture it with a fine spatula that reaches to the tip of the nose, and drain the watery mucus, and let his nose descend and enter soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And indeed strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called ulcer is nothing but disease which fits like water flowing down, and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to make the patient lie on the fitted and straight bed, with their head elevated from both sides. Position their head in such a way that you can see where the disease is coming from in each part, and treat only that area. Ensure the treatment doesn't spread elsewhere, keeps moving forward, and stop when the patient sees these situations occurring.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the disease's descent is not prepared, as we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a fine needle to apply it under their eyelid. Cut through only until you reach the conjunctiva near the cornea in the crown (into the desired area), making sure that the disease is already drained out from there.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it's drained, then you should apply hot water soaked in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have cooked fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And continue treating any other causes while it is being healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water flowing down from the body.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the characteristics of water in the division and which ones are suitable for puncturing as we have explained before, now that one according to their health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then guide the patient to lie down between your hands on a mat and place their head there, move them vigorously.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your right hand close to the eyelid of their head, if the head is where the water is, it's their right head; or with your right hand, if the head is on the left.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take a mirror if the head is on the left; or with your left hand, if the head is to the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the end of the mirror near the crown by the thickness of the eye in the eyelid's white part opposite the tear duct, and move the mirror with force while turning your hand there.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the eyelid's white part and feel that the mirror has reached because of vision.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And guide that the size of the path of the mirror to the front is the size of the space between from the pupil to the end of the shadow, it's the crown of the eye; you will see the pupil at that time with vision through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And guide the mirror inside the place where there is water, then pull it down once approximately again, and if the water descends immediately, then guide the patient so that they can see there momentarily, and the mirror in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And rest for a little while; if the water has descended, then you should pause that again before the mirror is submerged.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore, when it's closed and doesn't descend, then you remove the mirror with ease, turning your hand little by little around that. Then dissolve a small piece of clear gemstone salt in water and with that lather inside the eye; then pause outside the eye using wool or cotton dipped in almond oil and albumen from egg whites to wash it away from there.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And may those of our time pause on that as they do with the almond albumin.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your mirror doesn't enter the eye canal due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some people whose eyes are hard to move - then guide that you take the needle which is named the almond, this being its shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus puncture that conjunctive part with it, and don't end your hand on the cheekbone, but rather aim for a path down to the mirror location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And guide the mirror as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And complete your work, ensure the patient is prepared for a comfortable descent of sleep where they lie on their back in a dark room, and forbid all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And rest in the nature of water so that its nature is clarified, and don't let their head move to the right or left part at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And guide them according to their position into the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And guide them out of that dark room and let their vision breathe freely, show them some causes, then guide returning them into the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And don't guide that you perform this during treatment hours or shortly after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And have it guided that you avoid this so that water can gently pass through due to its large and vigorous examination.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if an abscess occurs after the exam, then have it guided that you open the eye in front of the seventh day, and correct that with water that would allow the abscess to drain.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	And then guide them to take their vision away and pause on the face of their mouth through which they control their breathing for a few days, existing in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And guide them to gradually get out of that room and talk about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that even for a short period of blindness, the student does not excuse vision several times, then you should be fervent about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And already we have reached the knowledge of some of those who are at Artach, and some say that in Ayrac there is a fire that makes an incision through which water is poured.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen such a complete remedy in our land, nor is there a legitimate water in any of the ancient books; it is possible that this water might be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the types of herbs for when they should be applied on those ones, that which is unknown to them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And if they are made of hemp or iron properly, and their extremities be at this subtle triangular shape, the sharp end thus is like that one which is its form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the face.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the face are flesh wounds of various kinds, some causing a condition that is gathered together like the stings of an insect's bite or as a polyp on the skin; this illness is called 'polyp' which resembles that particular skin condition.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And when his flesh is cancerous, reddened, of dark color; and from him it is that the flesh is white not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So in that which is in these white flesh not deceitful nor cancerous, know how to make the patient sweat by rubbing your hands under their arms and exposing them to sunlight, and allow their nose to breathe, and apply your elbow in those flesh areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then remove that from the outer parts, and proceed to cut out what you have identified in those among sharp and subtle knives between one part until you know that all the flesh has been affected; if there is a cause within the patient for which an incision might be possible, then you must use this among the finer tools to help remove that cause from the patient.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the master wishes to heal an infected or pustular wound, then you must allow that which cures them; or it is among malignant ulcers, then you cover and cauterize within where the infection can be removed and all cavities are affected.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And if there's need to make incisions in the face near the cut, add water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the face has opened and you notice moisture inside the palate from it, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate according to the cure, then know that inside him there is flesh with pus within your nose's bones where an incision has not been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So the master should introduce the patient's breath to him where there might be swelling, and use oil on his insects, taking breaks between each nutriment in proportion to what was said or monthly, and make the patient sweat and introduce one end of the breath into the nose at a ray or another cause which is possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has happened, let his smell enter until it reaches the canals of the nose, and sit above his belly button; many children perform actions resembling this on their schoolyards because it is a minor cause for those who want to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two ends of the breath, one end that goes above the nose and the other that remains in the nose; proceed to perform flesh suturing on the nuts that are in the breath, do this until you know that the flesh is already around the nuts of the breath.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the breath, pause in the nose near the extraction of pus with a spoon, and do this for three days or more until the medicine has dissolved all that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, pause with a lead pipe in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you are undergoing treatment that dries out, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the tool for nose purger which boils oils and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this from silver or hemp which resembles a small opened lamp, as if it were a small cauldron, and make the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed pipe like a stick, and the pipe of this tool for nose purger is flat, exposed; attach a handle at the rear end of it, where you hold that when you immerse oil or what you want from the liquids and susceptible causes in it.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nose purgers are expensive: prepare from castor oil, white beeswax, ginger, and parsley root, long pepper, garlic, mustard, and a spoonful of coriander seeds. And mix with flour and garlic juice, make them into pills, and take one pill with water that has been heated, and swallow it in the patient's nose facing downwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Regarding inflammations in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Some symptoms are shown as inflammation in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and ointed for a few days until the illness shows its care.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And as such, know how to insert that in the beginning of the appearance of him, and remove all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause over the spot or with a cautery or burning medicine which is in place of him.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the patient's insertion has taken longer than necessary and is swollen, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron which is an infected ulcer; these symptoms resemble what you would apply to this ulcer because of its great severity on him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to lion and not of dark color, and if there's a chance for incision everywhere, then evacuate the patient and make that mark, and treat the area with what causes it to drain out until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Chapter 26:
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Understand that when there occurs a breakdown in continuity in one of these cartilages, most doctors do not perform the operation otherwise than for certain individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cut, when dealing with any cause of those [conditions], consider if it's fresh disease in its root, then adjust both the edges of the wound for suture, and treat that area until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of continuity breakdown have already separated and some are made healthy, then cut that you scrape off every part of its external body until there is a disease.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both edges for suture and strengthen those, and apply dragon's disease powder on them along with a fine paste. Place a small amount of gauze over the powder for two or three days, then remove it and replace that dressing until the scabs fall off naturally, treating with oil until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method for suture is that you add the continuity breakdown or with needles as we have recommended in stomach suture, or add the continuity breakdown with wax and do this yourself and let them know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Chapter 27:
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Marks observed in men within the parts inside their lips include hard abscesses resembling fat of animals, some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then cut that you convert the lips and cavities of every hard part within them from all sides. Afterwards fill up the place with a mixture of wax until the disease is strengthened, then wash it with warm water and treat the area with what causes sticticatization, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Chapter 28:
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Numerous observations have been made about the adjusted meat in the gum which the ancients called "albumen", therefore cut that you suspend it by an incision or whatever you have done to that in its root, and when you make this incision you should allow the healthy fluid to flow or let the disease run.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place over that treated with wax or other hardening or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that meat returns, then you should make another incision and cauterize it again, in which case the cauterization will not recur.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Chapter 29:
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in their internal parts and at the entrance, and between the gums, there are hard, pointed marks, some observations show blackening and are caused by citron or vitreous substances that corrupt the gum, causing the teeth to be worn.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Then cut that you make a slit between your servants and place the head of each one in its true position, and remove the teeth where these hard marks and similar causes appear, and do this until no further cause damages them, treating the blackness, citron-like aspects and others until they are modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If the tooth is still in place as it should be at the mouth of digestion, then it's alright; otherwise, you repeat this procedure on those elsewhere for another day and second and third times until it reaches its final state where you want it to.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth require various forms of roto-resection and different shapes of marks according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And to know that the tooth resection from within their parts requires one type of resection tool while the one for resection between teeth is another, and these types of resection tools need to be prepared by you as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Chapter 30:
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cut that you cure the tooth of its pain at the root and delay in total tooth eradication, not for any cause that replaces the mark when it is removed, being a substance that evaporates during the removal of the tooth.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	If the patient insists on having this tooth removed, you must firmly certify which tooth is causing pain, as marks of pain separate the gum and fall from a healthy tooth. You remove that tooth, but the pain does not cease until the diseased tooth and its gums are removed; we have already seen this in operations for barb removal.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then you must be certified as to which tooth is causing the pain, and this you can understand well. Therefore cut that you incise around the tooth with a channel where there might be a root, so that it dissolves from the tooth-gum in all parts, then pull out that tooth gradually either by your fingers or with fine blades at its base until they are removed completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then cut large handles with strong strength or dissection force, and place the head of the sick tooth between your thumbs where you must ensure it doesn't slip, and pull out the tooth according to the correct way without twisting it, nor causing major pain to the tooth or to its extraction.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not removed by cutting, then take one of those instruments, and place that cushion under him from all parts with ease, trying to remove him as quickly as possible.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is decayed or eaten away, then cover that root with a cloth and tightly hold it at the tip of the delicate area so that it does not get squeezed during your pressure on that place while holding them.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And make an exquisite incision in the scarification around the entire part of the gum and maintain your strength so that you do not puncture that or break off a part of it, and return to the thigh for the cunningness that exceeds his first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what those ignorant barber surgeons do in their rashness and audacity during eradication, as they do not follow the advice we have given; their pricking wounds cause great illnesses among men, which are harder to treat than tooth extraction, and the roots of their teeth become overgrown, or some parts of them, or you might remove that from certain bones in the jaw, as we have witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the extraction, wash his mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is blood coming out due to wounds, just like from pricking wounds, then mix a little vinegar and sprinkle it on the wound. If that vinegar does not relieve, then use a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and fine tongs by which teeth are worked on at the beginning is long tip, short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when you use these ones.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And be like those of thick handles that, when you extend them with those, they are not bent, and their tips are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of iron from India, descending straight tips, and the tips of those should have teeth where one fits into another and are extended by bending down in strength, some pricked points having their tips like the bill of a stork which is called ciconia, this is its handle, and they are strong in construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and removal of bones in fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is broken off due to some cause, then cover the area with your hand over it for about one day or two until the place becomes soft; and proceed by using a pair of forceps resembling the bill of a stork called ciconia or guanta, which are the tips of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The tips of them should be made like chisels or nut crackers.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not follow my advice with these forceps or tongs, then cover the root and remove all the flesh and insert the tool called an awl, which is this kind of lever:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short tip that's thick at one end and not bent so as not to break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the root is cut away by this method, well done; and otherwise, help yourself with these other tools whose forms are as follows: the form of the first tool is triangular at the tip where there's some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it should be triangular and have a more delicate tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you will help with this tool having two ramps as follows in form:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other tools which are used in tooth scraping; for youth this tool is made that resembles a large stag's antler and it looks like this:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	from the triangular bent or short tip that has some thickness and is not bent to prevent breaking.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that tools for teeth with decay resemble other tools similarly.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, finding for themselves according to what it means to them the operation and various illnesses; there are illnesses for which the ancients would not describe or use proper instruments due to the diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken, then place your weight on that spot at its convenient location for you among the tools and forceps as we have mentioned in removing tooth roots, help yourself with this gesture:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And have some thickness gradually, and hold it or keep it in your mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is cut away; then proceed to restore the place with suitable medicines for that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there's a small pus pocket in the bone, then remove it along with its darkness, and cure that place until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not due to their natural shape, particularly when they protrude more in women, especially the more venerable ones; then consider: if the tooth is very close to another tooth, and it's impossible for extraction or treatment of that one, then leave it alone; but if it's not attached to any other tooth, then use this tool with this shape to cut into it; it resembles a pig's snout and is made of Indian iron with a very sharp tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your operation is such that you cut into it for many days due to the hardness of the teeth, and there should be no other damage to the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is extensively exposed by grinding, then grind it with an Indian file whose form is like this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it is all of Indian iron and has a groove; and use points as with an actual file where needles are made, grinding the tooth bit by bit over several days to facilitate this, in order that no other tooth be damaged or broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw it out at the tip, and cut it with some razor blades.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where a part is broken and you are left with the root, then correct that inside where the roughness of that portion has been smoothed out and made equal, and ensure it is filled so that the tongue does not cut into it nor the word be corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth due to concussion or removal by striking or impact, and the patient cannot lift what they are chewing on, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective. Then, so that they do not get further damaged, use gold rather than silver for those that are weakened by a toothpick, as silver turns green and can be left in place for several days; but no time should change to gold.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the toothpick have such subtlety and coarseness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the insertion, you should take the toothpick and place twice its length between two healthy teeth. And then make it grow between two tortuousities of the toothpick between two damaged ones, or if there is one or more, so that the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the insertion into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease so that it does not become damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And if your grip is such that you hold the toothpick, you should avoid piercing the teeth so they do not get damaged.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then remove the excess ends of the toothpick with forceps or scissors, and add those wherever you move them, and convert those as well as hidden ones between the healthy and damaged teeth to prevent any damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then pull it out in this way like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is dislodged or broken, strengthen that one or those with another tooth in such a manner throughout its entire process.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure for the extraction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as you would perform these actions:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done to return one tooth or two near the place of each, and they have grown back as we have recounted, and that they grow again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not let this be otherwise than with good artisans and wise people.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes, some diseases affect the bones of cows, and they are made in this way like a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth fails, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the operation for a lump in the tongue that impedes speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament in the tongue that you find sometimes or is naturally present since birth, or accidentally occurs due to a wound which has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, its head being there; and lift its tongue, and then cut that nerve ligament according to the width where the tongue has recovered from its recent position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or concretion in that area, and it has been left due to the consolidation of a wound, then you cut an incision and divide that from the width where you have cut the ligament and dissolve the lump.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And remember not to make a crack in the front of the flesh, and that you cut here so that there is bleeding from the vein.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the marks of the incision with vinegar or with oil, or with rubbing water; and pause for several days to lift the tongue gently; thus make it a habit that the patient lifts his tongue every night in order that there may not be consolidation of another lump.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is bleeding from the vein, pause over the hot iron tool; but if the blood escapes, then cauterize the area with a tubercular coal which you place above it.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards this cure is performed on all other causes until it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some diseases occur on the tongue resembling a small abscess that impedes the tongue from its natural operation and swells up so much that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on this is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun every morning and observe the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you notice it changes to a dark color or black, hard, which does not cause pain in the patient, then do not touch that which is swollen.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns to white, in which there is moisture, then you insert the needle into it, cut with a subtle spatula under it, and cut from all parts; and if bleeding occurs during your operation, then you pause over hot iron tools, which are made of glass, so that the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work within which you have prepared for him, within which he has been washed with fresh water and salt; and care for that according to the other cure until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of pus from both ears and that which is nothing in the earlobe, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it comes to the earlobe, they are glands that are assembled cotton-like, which happen outside and are called earrings. They are named so because when you treat them as we have said in the section and do not heal, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it's reddish in color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of causing bleeding from the wound; wait to smooth out that spot until it has matured, and then either you drain that area, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it's white in color, hard, and the root of him is fine, then that one will need to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And for the operation in him is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already rested under the knife as full recovery or if there is any diminution; then make sure the patient faces the sun, and his head is on your side, open his mouth, and have the server hold between their hands his tongue letting it rest against a noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And make it from silver or gold, and let it be thin as a needle.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, and place your hand over that area, then take an incision tool and make an incision there in the skin, and pull that outwards from as many parts as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another thing you remove some cause of the layers, and then cut that with an instrument as this is its form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it resembles forceps, but the ends of them are curved, so the opening of each one of those is against the other, very sharp, which is iron that has been twisted.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May if this tool is not present, then cut that with the tip of something as this is its form: And it should be sharp from one side, but not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have cut one, cut the other according to this method of incision, and after that the patient should be rubbed with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May if there is pus discharge, wash with decoction of sorrel or wormwood leaves and do it in the same way as for the causes that restrict blood flow so that the pus discharge is reduced, and then care for it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And there are some times when other abscesses appear in the earlobe besides those earrings, and cut them as I have said and instructed for cutting the two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman for an abscess that was natural in her earlobe, this abscess had a dark color and little sensation, which had constricted her earlobe, and the woman could hardly breathe normally, she had also been forbidden to eat or drink water, and she was on the verge of death if not treated within one or two more days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had swollen so much that there were two rows of teeth between where it went through with two cuts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut it roughly and took out one of their incisions, then pulled that out, and the large portion came out with it. Then I opened another incision where I could see through to the other tooth, then made sure the patient's mouth was open, and held his tongue, then placed the incision in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I removed a large part of it, and there was only little blood coming from him.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the earlobe of that woman was completely restored, she began drinking water immediately, and soon resumed eating food. So I didn't stop cutting out pus from that abscess for a long time, and in its place another abscess would appear where it continued to grow.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I washed and cauterized her earlobe, then there was a sense of relief; and later I walked around without knowing what God had done for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On cutting the gum when it is inflamed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When inflammation occurs in the gum, and it is inflamed and long, then it is named as a horizontal one. And if it's in the part that leaves out thick and round, then it is called a blister.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it has been cured as we have said in the section and your treatment does not agree with it, and many times when pus has already escaped from him and is fine, then you need to determine that if you should cut out what was added round; and if it's along that length, and it bleeds, reddish or black in color, without a sensation towards the patient, then it seems like you should test cutting his treatment, where there is fear on the part of the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you cut it as I have instructed according to its whiteness and length, make sure the patient faces him and presses his tongue with an instrument whose process is described in the cutting of two wounds, then place the incision in this new area, pull that out downwards, and cut it with one of the two tools that were said for cutting two wounds.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And correctly do not insert it anywhere but on that which is adjusted to the natural addition, for if you insert from his more, you will injure his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for the insertion, use that which we have rehearsed in the insertion of two parts, and treat it within so that it may be healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the insertion, then: use skill in the cautery of him and his fear, and the way of the cautery on him is simply with hot water, and you place the head of the patient under your hand, and press lightly the tongue of him against the tool we have mentioned, take some of that water as we have said at the beginning of the cautery procedure, and pour it over this living cause, and make sure it's neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument with which this is done:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the part that has been retracted into its cavity be ready for the medicine, just like when you take out a hernia, and place the tool with the medicine on him, and have the patient lie down on their back so that they can spit or clean saliva from their mouth due to the internal medicine, so as not to cause any harm in his stomach region and let him relieve himself.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula through the space for half an hour until you see that it has been numbed and reduced by the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take hold of and cover that part at the end of the tongue, immerse the handle in the medicine, insert the tongue with the handle into a tube such that the handle adheres to that tube, do this as many times as needed for obtaining what you want from the cautery of the uvula, and let it dry until it falls off about three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do that, and after applying the cautery on the uvula with a handled tool, cleanse it in the uvula's canal by sucking water through it, adjust that which is in the channel of his medicine, wash it with rinsing water, treat externally with ointment, clean inside with toothpaste, and wait until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is beneficial for insertion and far from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some ulcers are cured of the uvula with that which is delicate for cautery and insertion, which is treated by sub-aqueous vaporization in this manner: collect calendula, yarrow, rue, mugwort, Arabic gum, chamomile, soapbark, and similar substances from among the herbs, adjust all those causes or some of them into one vessel, let them soak in hot water, and simmer; then strain out the liquid and allow it to cool halfway in the vessel. Place a copper plate on this level with an instrument made of bismuth according to this manner; make it of silver or bismuth.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And immerse the end in the mouth of the patient so that the steam rises to the uvula on the palate, while the uvula becomes somewhat opaque.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat over that scabby spots while it dries, and remember not to perform this treatment when the appearance of abscesses starts, which would exacerbate in the abscess. Do not do what I have described here, but rather declare the abscess treatment for him after its occurrence.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not present this instrument, then take a stick and make it into the end of him a bunch of garlic, so that the mouth of the patient is fumigated, for the garlic cloves prevent the steam from burning his mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Regarding the removal of thorns and what adheres in the stomach, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Scabby spots adhere in the stomach or thorns from plants or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So when you remove what is evident, on which you look, because you press the tongue against the tool facing towards yourself, in this way you declare what is in the stomach.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not evident and is hidden in the stomach, when you make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, because a strong cause attached to the stomach can be eliminated through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a handful of oatmeal or lettuce leaves or a spoonful of dry bread; or take a piece of desiccated marine sponge, tie it firmly with string, and have the patient swallow that thing. In this way, as soon as it reaches the place where thorns are located, it is eliminated; then it causes vomiting.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And when you take a worm and drink it tied with string, let it settle in your mouth and gently pull it out; or take a spoon and place it gently inside the patient, then withdraw it gently.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if those causes are not eliminated as we have described, then use an iron tool according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And make it slightly larger than a small one, and at the end of him have a cavity which you will insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And make his head raised in the air, and keep watch that the doctor touches only his throat bone, for fear it damages his body or leads to complications with the bones of the neck, or causes damage from touching the ear or spine, which the doctor avoids by using their hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, let the patient not interfere with honey, by using their scientific knowledge of the location of the attached cause and penetrate deeply, then he throws his hand towards the instrument, all according to the quantity that has been prepared inside so that it is fully penetrated.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of gallstone attached to the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the gallstone is treated with what we have said in the division of recovery with medicines and it does not respond, consider this: within the patient's solar plexus, because you must understand the tongue of the patient under the instrument which we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you turn the gallstone, extract it from where it's small or by subtle steps.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it's not possible for you to extract it from there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the solar plexus of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula a heated iron, and do this as many times (until the gallstone is dead and leaves the solar plexus) and abstain the patient from drinking water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And take one vessel full of water, and open the mouth for him in that, and wash his mouth with that; and do not eat anything else from it, let him drink water once every hour by himself, until the gallstone feels the water when he drinks it.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not fully penetrated by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with garlic or with asafetida through the instrument that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and see how it proceeds.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in fumigation is as follows: take a bowl with lit coals and cover the bowl halfway with a cloth that has a string. Place the end of the instrument in this string. Then hold the fumigation above; have the patient place their mouth at the tip of the cannula and close their mouth so that you can determine if the fumigation reaches the gallstone, for when the gallstone melts.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't melt, then repeat the fumigation several times, and have the patient abstain from drinking, eat salty foods and grains, and don't drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be fully effective.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is how the tool looks when dealing with gallstones from the solar plexus when seen; it's similar to forceps like this, but if it were in the patient's body at any curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	It is laid out on the solar plexus, and the tip of it resembles the beak of a stork, that is held, in which it has been filed with a rasp, so that when you grasp any food, it doesn't slip.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XLI.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	And this is the summary of the discussion in relation to boils and in sections concerning them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Boils are specific spots, of bodily manifestations, according to their recollection, from any in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in puncturing and sectioning them by two ways, of which the first is through the special feature of boils themselves; and from there we understand their moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is regarding the locations where they occur in the body, for when a boil occurs in the head it's different from a boil occurring in the anus; and a boil occurring at a meaty location is different from a boil occurring at a joint; and each one of them has its purpose for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some boils are such that they should only be punctured when close to the healing of pus in those or completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other boils are such that they should be incised when crossed and not mature according to their completion; as with boils close to joints, for when a boil approaches the joint, its essence is extended until you can understand what's in its circuit, and hardens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it's near the main member, and if you delay the puncturing of it until after it has matured, damage will occur to the main member; or it's close to the anus, then incise the immature boil; and don't puncture when you encounter crossing without completion of digestion, but that which is near the anus, so you don't lose its essence and extend beyond the partitions inside the anus, causing a fistula, or one made in its tip that has not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you should know when to puncture the boil, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that it has matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, as well as the reduction of rigor and pulse rate, and the sharpness of the boil's head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that it has matured, puncture in the area of pus left by the boil and pus coming from the healing of the base.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And puncture should be made through the length of the flesh or the body, if the blisters are in the parts of the limbs or the feet, and at points on the spots, at the cords of the nerves, at the arteries; and, moreover, in all equal places where they do not reflect, which in those that are reflected, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the blister is in a meaty area, then it seems that you should make the puncture inside until digestion occurs according to proportion, as we have said; if you pierce there ahead of time, it extends the body's pain and dulls the body's sense, and makes the skin tougher and increases its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When such blisters must be punctured according to the size of the flesh or the body's need, or according to that which each member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And when you administer a small puncture, and for large blisters, a larger and wider or granular incision according to the diversity of the sizes of the blisters.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And for other blisters where it must be that the channel is returned and heated, when done in this manner like bread and made to last until completion, as happens with many boils and lumps.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And for those that are incised to a section having three corners; and for those when it is incised as in the shape of a thistle's needle, as with the blisters of gout.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And for them when circular and waning section is administered, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	When it comes to the one that does not have this as in superficial lion blisters, you should puncture that with a superficial puncture or simply flat.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the blister is large and has formed a healthy lump, puncture it but do not worry about removing all the pus at once; take out a part of it, then place the blister again the next day, and take out a larger part, and afterwards make granular wounds according to degree until there is an open channel.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is weak from disease, or a woman in pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decline; for when the animal spirit's humors are resolved with the discharge of health, and strengthens the patient, then open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take this chapter with great caution, and for the puncture in which you are puncturing these blisters, be sure to cleanse the sores and consider whether the sore from the blister is small, or a flat area; then administer remedies of any kind or local. And if the blister is large, and the openings of the puncture are granular, then you should place the patient in every position until they recover over time.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the blister a part of the channel has been removed or concaved in the circuit, then be sure to restore it with local old or thread sewn from the material; like when you flatten dough or breads, consider moisture; strengthen it by the third day; and proceed with it and treat what comes from the ointments until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	When bleeding occurs from illness during your operation, then you should administer water and wine in which you wet a piece of material, and place it over the area where there are spots of blood discharge.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	When the bleeding continues from illness, then be sure to provide treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in places like this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	When it is in the winter season, and the location of the blister is at a spot of nerve spots, then be sure to put powders in wine and oil mixture, and place those over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it's in the summer, and the areas are flesh-like, then be sure to place ground powders with water and oil or with wine and oil, all of which should be rubbed until the third day, as we have said, and when that's done be sure to remove the blister and cleanse it, then administer treatment for its recovery in whatever is suitable for it until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for knowledge of the treatment of blisters in general, but according to the way of distinction that I have said about all blisters on how their treatment proceeds through chapters individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Concerning sections of blisters that occur in the channel of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the channel of the head small blisters, which are specifically made of nodes containing tunics that make up their structure; and the specific types of their granules.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they have points, and those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those which contain moisture like dust, and resembling them; and of those that are lumpy, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and when extracting those there is no fear, as with the extraction of those you do not make an artery upset.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for this section is that you probe those with an instrument of which the shape resembles this somewhat, which is called an entrancer, so that you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is moisture, then split that into sections along its length according to the superficial section like this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Start from the section of line .B. up to the line of .G. Then as the moisture is evacuated, then scrape that skin containing that moisture, and don't leave any cause from all, so if it returns granularly, if there's any cause from that.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the hand in Egyptian ointment if available, otherwise in water and salt; fill that with the wound and leave it submerged for another day, while you digest everything that is beneath that skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian ointment on that hand again and thoroughly if you feel like it, assuming there is no damage underneath causing this issue; otherwise treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there's an abscess containing fat nodes, then you should make an incision on this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In that section take the shape of a cross, cut between the two edges of the section and then proceed with the cut from all sides. Strive to extract the tissue containing that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you feel resistance while piercing, then do what I told you to do initially.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, do this for the infected abscess and in terms of treatment according to what we have told you; if the abscess is slightly infected, that means there's little inflammation and a small amount of moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these abscesses are located on the head in some men where there's no moisture; this is because I made an incision over an abscess at the head of an old woman and found that the abscess was like a hard, white lump, not drinkable. If someone else had done it, they would have drained it just like that.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And for other abscesses that occur on the head or elsewhere like those in children's heads and behind their ears, it's not this part of the head. Rather, these are all superficial sections.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the puncture of those from the lower part up to where it's alleviated for the body in terms of recovery in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those with what you determine suitable for the process of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Regarding the section on scrofulas which occur in the throat.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses are found in the neck and under the chin, and around the glands; some of these also occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Those that occur in the neck are lumps that develop internally and are within their own tissue. All scrofula of these is within that tissue itself, just like with the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofula are lumps; some contain moisture and others contain pus. The malignant ones do not yield to healing.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And for that one which you use in the Touchment with good disposition, whose color is revealed by its manifestation and resembles the color of the skin, spreading everywhere but not attached to the nerves of the neck or veins, nor to the artery. It's not wavy; when you make an incision through dry superficial tissue from this part up to the remaining body part of the line .G., between the lines of .B., burn it completely and extend the edges of the skin with oil, or with oil points if needed, as we've said for abscesses on the head. Extract that slowly piece by piece.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And more caution is to avoid piercing the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the needle isn't sharp enough to not fit your hand during piercing or causes discomfort for the patient, then don't make an unnecessary incision. If you pierce a vein or artery and prevent your operation from proceeding, then rest in the wound with soothing powders that stop inflammation, strengthen the wound, and leave it so the pain of the abscess subsides and the wound begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then resume your operation while you've completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask yourself if there are any causes behind the other small scrofula nodules; hence, make incisions and clean those as well.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it's at the root of the large vein, then in that case do not make an incision on that scrofula along its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before doing so, hold it with a firm grip and leave it there to fall naturally on its own.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old leather which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and treat that area.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you've made an incision through the entire scrofula, then hold that you adjust both edges of the wound and place a bit of pus that's not excessively granular immediately after.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	And if you find that there's excess granulation due to the size of the scrofula, then understand to make an incision at the root of that, remove it and administer suture as is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce that with an external incision at the place where it appears to you in the location of its maturation, and pause piercing through the base of the pus below the body, as we've said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then when administering incisions, you should apply ointment like those, allowing that which is granular from the pus to dissolve.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you find that the wound has already been cleaned, then treat that with restorative flesh ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the section of the boil on the back that occurred inside the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They cut off this section in the scrotum, and there isn't anyone we know of in our land who has done such a thing.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the dialogue of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May it be in men that there is a corner, and where the excision of the scrotum should be avoided, because thus it would not happen to him young by himself; for all the veins and the major parts of the groin are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	May it be in those who have boils on the mouth or groin or both ears, when the groin disease is not at the root, one must avoid cutting into the scrotal section to prevent the loss caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want this, that we should incise the scrotum leaving three circles of the scrotal rings, or four at small sections for its width in the one between two circles by quantity, that the section is in chinch, not on cartilage. This place is suitable for a section being free of flesh and the veins of the blood of him are hisen.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is fearful, then he should extend the incision from the groin to the ankle, and then make an incision in it so that it reaches the canal, but avoid the veins of blood if there is any reason with those.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the testicles according to what we have instructed; and it means on the section of the canal by the swelling which is from that exudate towards him who has burst it, and for the resection of the pus.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is ripe for the feared perforation, add two layers of the skin from the wound's canal, and if that alone is the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause the flesh to regenerate until it heals.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bucasis has stated that the sum of this dialogue is only that you see some of these boils have reached up to the groin of the testicles, and the testicles have gone into death, and his life has been cut off. Some people used to incise the epiglottis so that the testicles breathe over the area of the wound for a breath or two, and they were saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason we should leave the wound open until the malice of the groin is consumed; and the malice of him lasts three days; and then we should do as follows to the wound and treat it until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my own experience is that a servant placed her hand in her groin and incised part of the lung canal there, and I was called to treat him, and it sounded like the groan of the dying person, and discovered the wound and sucked out the pus which was exuding from the wound little by little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So I was to admit that she had not incised a vein or artery, and the wind came from the wound, and cured it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And nothing happened to the servant unless perhaps in the pus, and some days later returned to their normal disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And I say that for the section of the scrotum there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol. 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	From the section about the boil that occurs outside the groin and is called the hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This boil named hernia of the groin is a large boil according to the color of the blood, and it moves in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural way, there is no need to cure it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental follows two ways of which one is similar to fatty swellings, and the other is like a boil that happens due to the blockage of an artery, and in that case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make any assumption about it as if it were iron, except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should investigate that and examine it as described, and if you find it resembling fatty nodes, and is not suspended on any of the veins, then you should incise it like fatty lumps, and remove it at its attachment to the skin and fat; and otherwise, then thoroughly examine all its nature, and treat the area with whatever promotes healing until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	From the section on the varieties of lumps.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the lumps there are various kinds, and I have already mentioned all their different types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should understand that I am listing here the difference between a lump and an ulcer to avoid confusion.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And I say that in ulcers there is heat and fever and violent pains during which the boiling of excess is calmed; and this putsrefaction process ends when later the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May it be in lumps there is no heat or fever nor pain, and contains that chinch which is to the spleen as its own.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of blood, and its beginning is like a boil and happens in the same way as emptying, whether major or minor, and they are according to two kinds; either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are spots, as I have stated in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When you reach the stage of healing for nodal issues, remove that and inquire about it at the outset regarding the instrument which is referred to as an intrument, according to its shape in the head which is approximately this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	It is the method of inquiring about pus and all kinds of nodes. You must take this instrument and introduce it into that wet spot which you find within the lump, and you will slowly push your fingers into it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the chain.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And guide your hand according to the size of the lump, and then extract the instrument. Consider what is left in the footprint of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the wetness is not too deep and of any color, then you should incise on the superficial section as I have said in other lumps.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no wetness left from the insertion, then you know that it is greasy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it as it has not taken shape in this way:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Like this was taught to you, suspend it with pins, and scrape the chain from all sides for ease, and preserve the skin or bag if possible over it, then extract that healing from within the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healing, and remove what has been exposed instead, then you will extract it by weight so that it does not damage anything unnecessarily.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it damages any cause from it, a little or too much, the node returns as was usual.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that it damages some small part from it, then complete the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders, strengthen the wound, place a heat source over that which is a lump, cure that alongside other treatments until healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it's a large node, then you cut both the lips of it and cure that with what is inside.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if it's pulsating, then you touch and treat the area of what is swollen that is the vein and straighten it for two days or three until the wound heals and rests from the boiling blood; then return to cut off what is damaged from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Regarding the forms of instruments necessary for sectioning and puncturing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Among those are the forms of instruments used, and they come in three kinds, from which one is large, another is medium-sized, and the third is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of a large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of an intermediate-sized instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small instrument is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them out of iron, lead, and tip-down extremities properly, so that the instrument penetrates into the lumps.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experienced ones, they have no name, and one among them is called red.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	They come in three types; one of which is large, another is medium-sized, and the last is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large experienced one, its form:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized experienced one, its form:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small experienced one, its form:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Let's ensure that they are for those lumps and sinus tracts and abscesses, so that within them there are from the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They are round sticks, large ones, lions, as big as large needles to which the strings are attached, and they are made of ivory, or bone or iron, or silver. The best are those that are made of ivory.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the forms of experienced black feathers are such that for these to be opened in the cavity of which there is reflection, they are reflected towards their lightness towards those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	They come in three types; some of which are long, and others are medium-sized, and the other ones are short, according to the quantity of width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large experienced one in lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the medium-sized experienced one in lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small experienced one in lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the pins are of specific kinds; among which there are some simple ones, having only one curvature, and they come in three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of these, they have hooks, and they come in three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those there are two curves, and they also come in three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And amongst them have three curves each, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of these are necessary in their respective places.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a simple large pin, its form:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple medium-sized pin:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a simple small pin, its form:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of an orbicular large pin:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of an orbicular medium-sized pin, its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of an orbicular small pin, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large pin with two curves, its form:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a medium-sized pin with two curves, its form:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small pin with two curves, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large pin with three curves, its form:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a half-circle has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a quarter-circle has three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of knives used for cutting and scraping nodes and abscesses, which come in three types: one large, another half-circle shaped, and the last is a quarter-circle.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of the medium-sized knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of the small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those knives are made with sharp points for cutting, while the other ends are not. They aren't held in such a way but rather to prevent injury during the scraping of nodes, fearing the damage might reach a vein or nerve. For these reasons, patients find relief and tranquility with a slight pressure that enables the effective removal of abscesses.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of mallets, they come in three types: large, medium-sized and small, like hammers.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large hammer:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium hammer:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small hammer:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from wood and resemble sticks, on which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the tip there's a needle-punctured area on an inner hidden surface, and this allows you to move towards both inside and outside parts when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which hide between your fingers are used for puncturing abscesses and not allowing the patients to feel discomfort, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of suction cups which help in reducing the flow of the disease, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small; these are their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made from citric wood, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And choose these types of suction cups: large, medium-sized, and small ones, because with them you can remove the disease's flow quickly in need, and then when your first aid is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to remove the disease everywhere in the body, but only on fatty areas; like on the swellings and thighs, on arm and chest lumps, and on nipples, abdomen, and thighs; similar to the fatty lumps.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some applications are made with those tools or small things resembling pieces of broken glass according to this form; when done through venipuncture or in case of cutting a vein or artery, the disease is removed.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some applications are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Regarding the treatment of men's nipples which are formed by females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some applications cause the enlargement of men's nipples as they start to become fatty, and then the nipples are enlarged further. They resemble female nipples, and we can distinguish them from false ones by their texture.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you apply this, make sure to scrape the lunar section according to this form, from line B into line G., and then thoroughly clean the greasy area. Then fill the wound with medicated ointment entirely and adjust both edges of the wound for suturing purposes. This will cure it if it is healed properly.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple sinks towards these parts and becomes soft due to its size as in females, then it should be split into two halves filled with pus. Two sections resembling a lunar figure are made, each containing the other, where the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line B. and the line G. Then clean the chain that is between the edges of the wound, remove the swelling, and administer the sewing process as well as powders necessary for healing inside when it's healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the scraping of this that needs to be done out of concern for the patient and due to the disease's flow, then you should fill the wound with corrosive ointment and leave it there until this corrodes the fatty parts, and then cure it properly when it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Regarding the puncturing of abscesses that have come to the surface, allowing me to operate on them.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that I find coming up to the surface are of the species of scrophula, thorns, which contain a layer that is pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those that contain moisture; among these, you should scrape according to this lunar form: from the line of B. to the line of G., and when all the pus within the abscess is evacuated by healing, then fill it with oil and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And soon after that, let the area be covered and treated with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes or scrophula, then you should cut over that in the same way we explained in the section about scrophulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound spreads throughout such that it causes pressure, then apply cautery as we explained previously.
Capitol .xlix.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	From the section on abscesses that occur through vessel damage or through a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When a vessel is ruptured and the cavity becomes consolidated which is above that area, then pus formations occur causing an abscess. The signs by which one can know if inflammation and an abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when an abscess is due to an artery it has a long extension in the body's front; and when you press on the mentioned places, you feel a wheezing sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein manifests roundly throughout the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if the treatment of this abscess is wrong, especially when left with these symptoms, or in joints, and in the neck, and in localized body pains; it's large, so avoiding iron in its cure should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities, or on top (head), avoid treating them.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	For the one that arises due to inflammation of the vessel's opening, it splits the tissue section longitudinally; and then cuts open the section with scissors and nears the vessel, delivering from within the tunics that are exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle near it and have it penetrate into the other side, strengthen the vessel with stitches twice in two places, - which causes pain to your experience during extraction of two vessels that are within the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then cut at the spot which is between two ligaments in the space where it burns all that's inside until the abscess dissolves.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which ointments are applied between the ligaments; and treat that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to a vein section, then you should hold it like you have access to the pus within the tissue until the abscess reaches your hand, and then insert the needle from the spot where you've held your hand. Then make that penetrate; and in that thread double inside as I told you when sewing on the thread at both ends of the thread between the two parts at both extremities.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert iron into that needle from all the pus, you should start your stitch with the first needle, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then drain the abscess in its central part within that when it settles as is inside, so you cut off the excess tissue and leave what's bound from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the powder which you have submerged in water and oil, and then administer treatment that is done with cloths and ointments until it's healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	The chapter concerning abscesses that occur due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similar to how abscesses occur in vessels and veins, they also occur due to impact on nerves or overwork, similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it's done like this in the areas around the knees or ankles, or in any place where pain occurs at the joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it's a hard abscess, and its appearance is like the other skin, and it affects the major parts of his disposition senses and when it's stretched due to intensity, one feels in it the patient's similar confusion.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that extends in the body's front, and by itself allows tissue to return, and one feels pain everywhere and doesn't move towards front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So for those that are at the joints, you should not be bound with iron, which will strengthen its contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And apply this treatment in the head or forehead by opening it with a needle.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	And if the abscess is small, then treat it at its root and remove that from its base.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it's large, then suspend it with a hook, scrape that off, and place something underneath; and adjust the wound with stitches, treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Capítulo 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The section about abscess that occurs due to childbirth, which happens in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Examine the swollen and red areas in the abdomens of those affected and in other parts of the body of those subjects which are called fungiform due to their similarity with fungi; from which the base is thin and the head is large; already the lips of those have increased, it is from those that are small, and it is from those that greatly increase.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one where in the patient's abdomen were two parts which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white areas, of thin tissue.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those would be inverted and would split, and moisture would flow from that continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I inserted them and explored each one in a period of about eighteen uncia (a unit of measurement). And the other was six uncia.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation at insertion, you should consider if the patient is wet, and the color of the area is white, wet, from thin tissue; so then you would insert it laterally through a cut, and have your presence with the cautery in fire, such that swollen areas can be expelled from that section causing pain; and if there's no sensation, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is fearful and anxious, be cautious around iron; instead take lead that has been recently made, and strengthen in that part, the way we have said it to be; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And adjust near the constriction of the lead thread; thus, do not cease to strengthen large amounts of lead in that part, until it is removed and falls by itself from the work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if that part is due to a large reason, then in the place of anxiety and fear exists some cause, and more so in the case it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It's possible that you might remove the disease from him, and then cautery that area so it doesn't return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat that place until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be cautious not to presume that you are removing a part of dark color, with little feeling, under careful examination; for such is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come back with recall from childhood nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of the prominence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Navel prominence is caused by various reasons; or through cracks in the stomach which is above the belly, and injuries to the skin or intestine according to what happens in other ruptures; or due to infection that flows from a vein or artery as mentioned previously, or due to constricted wind circulation within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it's due to stomach crack and injury to the skin, then the color of the pus is similar to the body color; and its pain is intense, appearing in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then that position is in your area as we have recounted, with more intense variation. As you press that on your fingers, it gets concealed, and then returns; and when you gently touch it on the surface, it becomes magnified movements.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if due to dampness, then the pain is intense and it's not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it compressed, nor does it increase.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if due to infection, then these signs appear in the pus turning black and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it's due to flesh nothingness, then there is a heavy, large, and hard pus, which forms according to the amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it's due to wind, then touching it is intense.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation here is that you should consider if the navel prominence is due to infection in an artery or vein, or due to wind; thus, one must refrain from treating it where there is fear and anxiety as we taught you in the previous chapter regarding the pus related to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or skin, then you should order the patient to lie on their back and stay in that position. Then test through the entire navel area, and order them to lay against your hands between their buttocks, and wrap a cloth tightly around this area as you tested it. Extend the size of the pus over the top parts with one large hand; then tie firmly or loosely with thread or string, following the pattern of tying normally.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then open the middle of the pus extending over the muscles, and introduce your fingers into that spot and remove the intestine; and if you have found or missed it through the muscle, then you will suddenly extract it and push the intestine back into its original place inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the skin, then take that with one hand; and remove excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it is against your artery or vein, then encircle that movement, and proceed with your operation again; take two needles and insert them in those two strong threads, and introduce the needles around the pus area in a crisscross manner, making them penetrate. Then strengthen the pus in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, or leave the needles and let the flesh extend over where it should fall by itself; or open that when it becomes thin and is ready, and place something there, then treat that with the ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh nothingness or dampness in it, then you should extract the pus as we have said and remove the infection or dampness which you find there, and treat that with what heals and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol. LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of childhood diseases.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already discussed, in the division, about the special types of childhood diseases and how they are treated with medicines, and that healing through iron alone should not occur unless it is not ulcerated; we also talked about diseases that arise due to the lack and negligence in treating them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they say that some childhood diseases can be eradicated from certain locations where it's possible, such as in the head which is found in nipples or on the cheek and resembles parts of the body that are meant to be removed completely, especially when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	And when it's old and large, there is nothing to do for him, as I have not been able to cure anything of this sort before nor have I seen others who could.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation on the patient is when you allocate everything as we have said, that is, you precede and leave the patient undisturbed, and cleanse him of black bile on several occasions, then you adjust it if it's an internal disorder with obvious symptoms.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient for operation in the position suitable for the procedure, and ensure that they breathe easily as it is done; and make them concave from all sides so that a good thorough examination can be conducted without causing any damage to their condition.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the treatment flow naturally, do not puncture lightly, squeeze the affected areas, and remove any excess fluid with your hand or an appropriate tool among the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is an accumulation of thick pus that seems to be coming from a vein or artery, then apply a cautery inside where the pus flow stops, and afterwards proceed with another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Crown. (The term 'capitola' or 'capiol' is used in some regional dialects to refer to something related to the head or crown.)
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division of the various types of dropsy caused by water and the symptoms of each type. For treating any of them, we use medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	That which is cured with iron is merely the type of anemia alone, and it should not be treated as close to the types of tympanic or yposaccarian dropsy, for those are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of tympanic dropsy with medicines and if your treatment does not improve, then consider this: if the patient has already gained strength, or it's another illness in addition to dropsy, such as cough or stomach ache similar to those, then be cautious about using iron on them because caution is needed regarding this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you notice that the patient is getting better from excessive strength, and if it's not another illness but only dropsy, then there isn't any concern about age either. The way to perform the operation for them would be to lift the patient between your hands, and then assist them to relieve their stomach with your hand, expel water towards the exit point of the urinary tract. Take a thorned needle according to this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Use two long needles with sharp points, like a thorn; however, for this operation in the patient, make them short and little by little. So that during the procedure on such, you don't penetrate into the intestine and ensure it's done properly.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider that if the production of dropsy is due to the intestines, then it involves cutting off from the navel by the length of three fingers towards the exit points, on the right side of the patient over the urinary tract.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the production of dropsy is due to illness of the kidneys, then your cutting point should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the production is due to milk, then your cutting point should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And remember that when your cutting point is towards the side where you want the patient to breathe, so as not to allow excess fluids to flow into that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And when you are done piercing the whole line with the instrument and entering that section, lift your hand towards the thorn between the line and the siphon. Then scratch that area. And if it's as much as a fingernail or roughly that amount.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And when you pierce the siphon so that the thorn reaches the desired location, this is where water is found.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And after extracting it, insert an instrument with this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It's similar to a delicate silver catheter; it's made of silver or ivory or bone. At the lowest part of the catheter there is a small point, and on its sides are three needles: two from one side and one from another; this is how the tip should be cut like a feather, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the end of this part there is a ring, which when the instrument reaches water, immediately starts moving over the instrument. Then drain out half of the water at moderate intervals, if you evacuate more than that in an hour, it will weaken your patient's strength due to animal spirit resolution, or might cause him to fall into coma and approach death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Remove that according to the strength of your patient and according to what you interpret from the patient's condition during the operation, considering their pulse strength and goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And after removing the instrument, collect the water that causes it, which is retained by the line that catches the needle you've made sure to pierce in accordance with that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the process with the instrument on another day if you notice that the patient tolerates this treatment, and extract a small amount of water. Do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to completely remove the water but just a little bit.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are worried about the patient and remove a large amount of water, then treat them with burial in sand and sweat baths under the sun for a long time. Treat them with dehydrating medicines until they recover.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply a cautery on the stomach and kidneys near the water extraction site, as I have previously described in what has preceded this.
Capitol .lv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	From the treatment of children whose kidneys have not yet been punctured for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children's urine flows out through their mother's body, and the mixture's head is not punctured (or it is straight or not in its proper location).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, upon birth, perform the operation on them as soon as they are born with a delicate incision according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place in the straight path of the urine a small lead pin and bind it, leaving it for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, let them go and urinate; and then return that (the urine flow) back to normal.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine which was over the site does not heal this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Make sure that the path of the urine is straight by using a lead pin as we have said, for too many days before it becomes larger.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	For those in whom the urine is not in its proper location, it becomes blocked, which causes this issue with them. The one that is natural and makes the passage of the urine go up to the end of the penis so that they cannot urinate inside; while lifting the penis by their hand to above; this does not affect their generation, because their semen cannot reach their mother according to rectitude, and it is a problem with the kidneys.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation on them is that you place their thighs above themselves and extend the tip of their penis with your left hand with strong extraction, then cut the tip of the tip of the site of the prepuce with a sharp blade as if it were an inkblot, or you do not remove any part so that half of their skin resembles the tip of the penis and that urine falls in the middle place according to how we do.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember that in your operation for the flow of pus, what diseases might occur to this; and take care with them about the one you are cutting off pus from, and leave them as if you have cut it, and treat the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	And here ends section 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Regarding the white matter that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis, as well as pus, darkness, and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Some occurrences of this white matter occur in the skin and is an indication of kidney problems.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant ones, hang them on a thin cord and cut that between which you will remove it all; then cover that spot underwater with Egyptian oil; and over that place, treat the oil of diafinicon until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white matter is malignant, note its color, then treat it with cautery close to where you made the incision and the amount of treatment.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	So if white matter is found on the prepuce at the tip of the penis in a non-circumcised individual, and one part of the white matter is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then remove the white matter that is inside from when it starts to harden; and then treat the external part, so that when you treat this period, it is not guaranteed that it will not be squeezed.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it is common for the genitals and prepuce to have blackness and corrosion. Therefore, treat everything that has already deteriorated and that wants to decay or that has already decayed; then draw a line over that around that with honey, which is treated with flour from saffron, rosemary, and juniper berries.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat that with the other treatment until it heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	So if there is pus discharge, then apply lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	And lunar cautery consists of two simultaneous treatments, one for pus discharge and the other for the wound when it is decayed.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the tip of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that time, then treat by inserting a lead catheter into the middle of the prepuce so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Regarding the adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis (this adhesion only occurs in that which has a tight prepuce, and above it no circumcision is performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) treat by cutting with blunt scissors until the ligament dissolves and the tip of the penis is freed from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to carefully cut those out, then treat by cutting with scissors some part of the tip of the penis and prepuce, and this is that when the prepuce, which is delicate, is lightly punctured because of its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And carefully separate between the prepuce and the tip of the penis by a thread of its delicacy, which has already been mixed in water to prevent further occurrence.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And treat with styptic powder until it heals completely.
Capitol .lvii.	And here ends section 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Regarding the circumcision of children and the treatment for what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution like other wounds: however, due to our operation and our will, it is more appropriate in this case for children, so we must assign better surgery and ways that preserve health while losing as little.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	When ancient people didn't say to perform circumcision in some of the free moments, for they don't use it in their laws, and it's only because we acquired it through experimentation that I have found out that most craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and castration on novices and students; and they use honesty with the faithful and cutting with the fingernails.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these methods and found that castration with knives is better than circumcision, using honesty with the faithful rather than circumcision like fingernails. It avoids chaining the joints above, where the foreskin's chain is made up of two tunics, and leaves the tunica clitoridis below, making it stronger and allowing for another type of cutting and assured pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And castration which is done by surgeons, who use their fingers, doesn't ensure the cutting of the end of the male member, for it forcefully enters into the passage of its flesh.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with fingernails, forcefully using iron spoils your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the chain of a child is short by nature, and cuts made in this manner do not require castration, which I have seen.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The benefits of castration done with knives and metal in the flesh, is discovered by experience to me, as knives offer a proportionate cutting, so that the sharpness above is thus like the sharpness you leave; therefore when you press your hand it provides two kinds of sharpness, and cuts according to comparison at once; and this makes compression of the flesh into a figure containing the chain of the penis from all sides, on which no mistake is made.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first way of operation is that you make the child stand very well if he belongs to those I understand as a little one, so that you do not simply let the flesh touch its penis only, and leave it for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him rejoice in every way possible that he receives according to his understanding from this.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have him lie between your own hands well prepared, and it should not be done hastily; hide the knives in your hand or leave them on your belly, so that the child does not see those or any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the penis and blow on the chain, and pull that in until the head of the penis is freed, and carefully castrate him as what is added to it in foreskin.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then lay the marked place on the penis doubled, and bind it at the base with a little more on another piece of string, and apply this to your hand as you guide the position of the string after good retention, cut between two pieces of string.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the chain slightly and flatten the head of the penis; and gently pull out the skin a little at a time, as this is better; then pause with powder on it and over the powder lay a cloth spread with poultice made from oil-soaked wool in water. Leave that there for another day; and treat it with healing until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the knives for castration, this is how they are:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the first blades not have a handle and the others be handled, so that there is no mistake of the rod of the key, and let the length of the two sharp parts be thus like the length of two oars equal in size.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in castration is when forcefully you remove the whole intrinsic chain or a part of it, and thus you must cut.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So consider that you should extend that of your hand to your fingernail in front of the elbow on it, and cut that according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it at your fingernail, then cut that with a knife and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if it has passed three days, and what remains of the swollen penis is retracted, then you leave that until the swelling has been reduced by the cauterization, and cleanse that with ease, and cut it according to what suits you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard against the head of the penis, which is not for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat it with that which heals the wound from powders as we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has been cut into the chain to measure, and you follow its parts above, this will not bother him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with what we have said until it heals.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Chapter 58: On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstructions made by stones or by clotting blood, or by blockage or with a plug, similar to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and there's retention due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then it follows that the patient should be tied up above their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then have him place his feet on their own and stretch out their belly from the part above their hips, and the patient tightens their stomach as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	And then here the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone behind the parts, so that the urine becomes complete.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved in what we have said and the cause remains on the patient, then you must intervene upon them; here lies the treatment for you to perform with a tool which they call syringe, of which this is the form: It's made of silver and very fine, somewhat like a needle from a syringe but slightly longer than half a palm in length, with a thin tip at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to conduct urine discharge through that is: take the bent horn and bind it on the tip of the leather or cloth for good adherence; insert the ends of the horn into the opening you have made in the syringe, and if there's any excess from the cloth, cut it off but rather enter it into the syringe with vigor. Then later move the syringe near a heater and apply butterfat to it.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cut the patient's thigh above, and clean out the bladder and penis with oil mixture, and olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And place the syringe in such a way that it reaches the root of the penis; and later fold the penis upwards from the opening of the anus; and then push the syringe inside; and then push this inside until the bladder is reached, and this ensures that the thigh is immersed in the empty space, and not to do so according to this order but rather where there's a tendency.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually extend the horn through the cloth little by little, for urine will soak the cloth.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And remove that and proceed with urine therapy, use the syringe, do not stop this process and use the syringe until the bladder and thigh find relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LI.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with vinegar and using utensils that agree with this method.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or inflammation within it, or if you want to distill waters and medicines inside, then this must be done with a tool called vinegar clamp. Here's its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If it is at the end of its application and it feels dull, then you close it.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place there are three parts: two on one side, like this size.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is a hollow area, in which that substance is introduced, and according to the amount that pushes it out, you add more, within which when any cause is pushed out by that from the moisture, it's pushed out, and when it's expelled, this is pushed out, and when it's expelled for a long time, as per how it functions like vinegar in which naphtha was treated in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So if you want to expel moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the vinegar clamp into the moisture, and pull out that which has been pushed out upwards, for when the moisture is expelled it moves towards the interior of the vinegar clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And later insert the tip of vinegar clamp into the penis according to what we advised in the syringe; and then push out the moisture as you push it out, for when this moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the thigh holds this moisture.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of a subtle catheter to which the bladder is catheterized, and that is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or copper, where the tip is either like a small feather or resembles that shape internally, and its shaft should smoothly extend inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And proceed to grasp the bladder muscle, pause there in the moisture you wish to catheterize in the bladder, and then bind that between two pieces of a double horn with strong ties. And heat that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And later insert the tip of the catheter into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And later, press your hand on the bladder with the moisture straightened out deeply, as the thigh holds that moisture which has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you don't have a bladder present, then take a sheep's stomach and make a circle from that; puncture the whole of its roundness; later insert a strong horn into those parts, as they are turned; later add the circle in the same way it is added, so if you pause with what you want of the moisture, oil and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And later you bind that in the tool and do this as you did with the bladder, expressing your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	Regarding the extraction of gallstone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the types of gallstone and their treatment with medicines, as well as the differences between gallstones formed in the bile ducts and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken about the stone in which the operation takes place, and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder is exactly that which is formed within the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it is said that the stone generated in the larger bladder mostly goes to children; and among its signs is that the urine that leaves the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears like sand; and the patient rubs their penis, with heated spots over the anus, and nearby is being raised; and when ejaculation occurs from the anus, it contains pieces of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And healing is immediate for children who have reached the age of fourteen; and it is difficult to heal in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	It may be that among those, there is a middle ground due to this water between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of the one where the stone is greater and healing is easier; if it's small, it's contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And how do we approach the treatment of that, begin with the modification of the patient using a cauterizing tool which opens up the entire opening within their intestines; that opening, sometimes by heated spots prevents the formation of the stone from its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And place the patient on their feet and make them sit upright with a cauterizing tool for themselves that allows the stone to descend into the bladder's base, or escape to any location or by heated spots.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And prepare that cauterizing tool between your hands and the patient's, let the rest of their things be left as they are for you, so that the whole bladder may be made to tilt towards the parts left.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And prepare to remove that entire protruding area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately cover it with a section on top of it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't feel it all through your touch, then cover it with an oil of your hand's index on the left side; if the patient is elderly or a child, use the 'middle' word for the young adult and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And prepare to find the stone inside while your finger remains there.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that small stone gradually into the bladder's neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And apply pressure on it with your finger, and expel that from the exit points outside; towards the spot where you placed the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and instruct another minister to stretch their right hand above the exit points with their other hand, and use the cord left by the genitals towards the spot where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And prepare to insert some fat from this substance, which is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide that which is between the anus and genitals, not in the middle place, before the left side of the thigh; let the section be on top of that stone and your finger be in the anus, let the section be transverse, so that the exit section outward is wide and inward narrowed according to the amount I extracted from the stone to its possible extent, but not larger, for when we use our finger which is in the anus, the stone should be prevented from coming out due to this section and it becomes too tight.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there are stones some of which have angles and edges, due to which their ejaculation is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that one which resembles a lion and has a round shape, it causes easier ejaculation due to this.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if it's that one which has angles and edges, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not too tight, then cover it with your hand or strengthen over it decently, the end of which is like a file on which you strengthen on the stone, and do not pull away from it; or insert this subtle tool of curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot over it, then extend your tool a little more, and if you feel blood flow, cut gently on that with nitric acid.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and gently penetrate towards it; and you gently push something close to that; and similarly do so if there are more spots.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it's large stone, then the lack of knowledge is that you penetrate that with large section, which befalls the patient due to one or both causes: either it stays there or changes into a continuous urine distillation process, so that the area is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And administer expulsion of it so that it becomes loose, or engrave in the crack with scissors where you extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	And when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment of aloe and dragon's blood extract, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine or in ground oil and water for vinegar to be released.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And prepare the patient to rest on their back over their chest, and do not change their clothes until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And once he has changed his clothes, wash the area with water and oil, then treat it with a thin ointment and with an ointment of diabazilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound an abscess occurs with corrosive pus, adjust and treat it aggressively. If that is how it looks like, as if the infection is within the bladder frozen, and causing forbidden urine (which is known by its elimination through urine), then you should intervene in the wound and remove that pus. Because a Roman causes the bladder to decompose inside the bladder and for it to putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And place the wound under a gentle rinse with warm water and salt, opposing all kinds; use what is suitable for your healing process within which it will be healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all the hours of your entire healing process, that you apply to both thighs, adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the wound is small and located at the root of the penis, if it is infected within him, and urine elimination is forbidden, then treat that as I advised you before reaching this stage; for this healing process is criticized by this technique; and already I have made this, and what you should do is take a soldering iron, which is the shape of this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Of triangular shape, sharp, infected within a stick.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take the instrument, and position it at that part of the penis, leaving the wound there so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then place the iron at the penis, making a hole with ease within which the tool will reach that wound.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the tool with your hand in that small wound little by little, making a hole inside which you will allow it to penetrate from the other side; so that urine is liberated immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that which is being treated from the part forward of the penis; when that is healed and filled with urine, it becomes well again, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And if this healing is not properly done for any cause that prevents it from continuing in this way, then leave the tool on the wound, and another instrument on top of the wound.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut over the wound between two folds on that penis.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove that (implying the contents or structure being referred to in the previous line).
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untwist the thread and changes the frozen infection, which happens in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to leave the soldering iron on the wound, only so that it doesn't return to the bladder, and the other thread on top of this is for that reason; when the thread is untwisted near the exit of the wound, the cause returns to its place and takes back the infection.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And that's why it is necessary when you have the soldering iron above this, to lift the cause from these parts, or if it returns you should remove your contribution and takes back the infection as we've said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of a wound from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	In women, a wound (or perhaps a similar condition) is less common to occur.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you find a wound among those conditions, then the healing is difficult for them, and it is prohibited through various methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their characteristics is that when a woman allows her uterus to be too full.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you don't find a woman who knows how to describe if she has been with a man during her fertile period or not from a maiden to a married state.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you won't find a woman who knows this technique, especially the operation with her hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location for the operation on a wound in women is far from the location of the wound, so you need an extensive operation area, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If need arises for you to do so, then seek out a skilled male physician, as it is more reliable.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking that skill, then seek out an almost subtle male physician, or present a knowledgeable woman midwife skilled in female matters, or a woman who is partially proficient in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So make that presentation and command her to do everything you instruct her, from the inquiry about the wound to its beginning; which is why she must inspect if the woman has a uterus, then place your own thing in her buttock and try to remove the wound.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if she finds that, make her forcibly take away your own thing, and then command her to cut into that wound.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	And if she is not a uterus-bearing woman, then command the midwife to place her thing in the woman's abdomen and inquire about the wound. But hold your left hand on the bladder, press that well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	When that is found, then dig in gradually until you widen the opening from the bladder's orifice to each of its parts through which it spreads into their share of her virtue so that it reaches the level of the knee.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then carve over that location near the mouth of the womb; you must reach the level of the knee from wherever it stops on them. Keep the stone in that part and let the rest not be dislodged by the stone when you remove it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And make the section small at the beginning; then insert the rod over that section. And if you feel the stone, then adjust it to the section according to the quantity of stone that you know will be dislodged from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the sizes of stones are grains: some of them being small and large, hard and sharp, long and round, and have edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And know how many types you are of for this so that you can signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to see the release of urine, adjust in that very place and let it pass for one hour before removing the obstruction, then proceed with your operation until the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the tools you were told about in the extraction of stones in men, so that you can be helped by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want the release of urine and know that the expulsion of urine is from the artery that is incised, then pause powder over the area and strengthen it with powdered and constrictive substances; do not exceed this. And let the stone remain, do not remove it; for a strong one will cause the patient's condition to worsen.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the sharpness of the urine has reduced somewhat after several days, and the place is healed, then proceed with your operation until the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Section 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	About hernia in the section.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is simply an accumulation of moisture in the white bile, which contains the gall and is located at the site of the genetic chain; it is called bile.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some are in the proper abdomen which nature prepared for them at the location of bile, once it is cut off where there is already more bile; this is the genetic chain between white bile as we have said, and it is not this but another bile.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to overproduction that affects the genetics, so it pours out this substance into them; and some may occur due to blows struck on the genetics.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors; its color ranges from yellow to bloody or reddish, or it's dark and fatty, or it's watery white, and this is what is more common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one can determine where this accumulation of water is located are: if it's in the white bile as we've said, then the swelling appears elongated along its length like a figure of bile, and the genetics become visible; for moisture surrounds it from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper abdomen, then the swelling occurs at the location of bile and that's why we judge that there is more bile.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the chain of genetics and white bile, then you can feel it with your hands.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you express the color of the moisture on the swelling through a cut in it; and according to what stands out in the trace of penetration, judge about what is inside them.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And when we come to treating them, then dig so that you command the patient if this is possible for you, to urinate freely, and fill their body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then have them lie on their back for some reason or another, and place your hands under their sweat towels.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left part of them, and command that the servant follow on their right side, which extends their hand to one of the two sides towards the chain of genetics and the location of the miracle in the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a diagonal cut, and divide the chain of genetics at the middle point along its length towards the pubis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to rectitude at an equal distance from the line that should be at the skin of genetics, until it reaches white bile including.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scratch that area, observe and keep watch so you don't scratch too much; your scratching should reveal something hanging down towards bile more and examine it carefully according to the quantity you can manage.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white bile filled with water through an extensive hole, and remove all of the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two folds of the section with scissors, and extend white bile towards the parts above; don't touch the chain within the genetics including it, and cut white bile in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut that all or in pieces, especially its finer part. If you don't examine the incision thoroughly, it won't be certain that water doesn't return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	And if the bile is processing outside of its chain during your operation, then when you have completed the section of white bile, return inside it and adjust both folds of the genetics's chain with stitches, then treat that similarly to other wounds until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the belly is corrupted by another illness, then operate to discover which vessels are above the suspension apparatus, and extract the belly, and then properly treat what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is divided into two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that section as you did on the other equally; and if it seems to you that it's an operation, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then clean the wound, and between these sections immerse wool in oil or in rubbed oil; and place another wool layer that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread this over two thighs and the belly area; and cover with folded sheets and powders, and let them dry according to this shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then have two layers and let them be filled with damp wool according to this appearance; and make the ends such that they are pressed by a hand or wet wool, and add them into the structure in the waistband of your trousers, one of the ends takes inside the other, and the second end goes to the crotch part of the pants, and two ends on each thigh, and two others on each hip bone, and all tightness should be adjusted into the waistband of your trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And for some cases of this hernia it is medicated artificially with a cautery in place of the section on iron; and you would take a subtle surgical instrument and cut there where the genitals' cord is, and ignite according to what we have recommended that when revealed is the white spleen containing water, then you do so by cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that spleen and ignite so that all the moisture is evaporated inside.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the spleen with threads, scrape with threads, and scrape with a slightly ignited cautery; cut there as long as it is within your ability to eliminate all of it; and beware not let the fire touch the belly.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is better saved far from bleeding and much more so than an operation on the section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if it bothers you in the middle of an operation or during a cautery, or bleeding, then understand what kind of complication is happening to you through this, and apply the treatment as prescribed for that.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	And if the patient is weak and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then perform a piercing according to what I recommend; and this is when it has been certified that you should do, by what we have said about meanings, that this hernia is water-filled.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And then understand that you should make the patient lie on a raised surface, pierce the abscess at the lowest part of the affected area with a horizontal incision, and continue the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if the cut is wide where all the water flows out completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then press on that spot and smooth it, so that all the remaining water drains away.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it while the wound is healing.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	And if a complication occurs during the drainage of water at that time you pierce there: and this is not done unless the white splint in the wound's opening causes complications and prevents water from entering, then understand that you should place in the wound a small object or tool with which water from dropsy is extracted; its shape is shown beforehand; or fit on top of the wound a small cover.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and is purified approximately two months or around those; and when it has accumulated, then this should be drained according to that systematic method, so that the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter/Capital LXIII (seems like a chapter number).
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Regarding section on fatty hernias and their treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And know that in this section regarding this hernia, the fear of cancer is prevalent in major decisions; for which I have seen your salvation and being saved by that better way.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation for that one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So I say that the abscesses are found in the bodies where the tendons are composed, and this is done due to various reasons: or by an acute overflow of fluid which spreads through the tendons, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, it's not detected in the pain, and it's a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a soft small abscess is formed, whose color is dark, and it doesn't hurt the patient.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the obstruction of the veins, and because of this inflation already one can remember the patient, or by the inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	And this is known as the spread of abscesses when you press that against your fingers; and understand that don't touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And this is done due to the inflammation of the vein, does not spread from any cause you should press against your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that for this type an operation can be done and for others of flesh; and you cut the tendon's cord, extend the belly towards the upper parts, extract the one from the white spleen, free the suspension apparatus of the vessels, tie them, cut the suspension apparatus that you have freed from all parts of the belly.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the patient already has those hardened masses, then do so by taking out the patient's body and placing it under them.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any parts of the lungs or between what is inside the heart cavities, then do so by removing all that adhesion and insert a round opening.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If it's a natural formation of flesh at the site of adhesion which is behind, then do so by removing all that comes from you, and remove the body as well in accordance with what we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And once your operation is completed, then fill the wound with oiled and pure wool and let it heal; and thereafter treat that as in other healing processes until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Regarding the treatment of hernias that occur in the stomach.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	If there is an abscess wrapped by some kind of covering resembling a bud and causing the weakening of testicle functions, and it makes physical exercise and walking on one's feet difficult.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in treating this illness, due to fear of what precedes it, there is reflection that must be taken into account.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, when they say surgery according to what I first did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And tell that when you make the patient lie on an elevated bed; and place the testicle suspensor to your side parts; and put the pelvic ligament under your hands where they are located at the waist; and have those other servants ready, and stretch those with intense extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then make an incision on the lower part with a sharp tool through the section crossing into the right side of the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all parts as we have said in the extraction of stones which are inside the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those a needle with a double thread, and sew that at the first of the areas where you encounter veins, and sew it again from another direction at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then make incisions in the middle part according to the length of the body in a straight line, and extract that which is aggregated from the liquid, putrid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with treatments for other wounds when you wish it to be cured by itself as if they were bleeding vessels that you are one of two genitians, which is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If veins occur throughout the cavities, then do so that the testicles are removed or that the testicles for this bleed through that area, so that it is deprived of all nutrition by blocking the veins, and they are reformed, or that stop bleeding naturally without affecting those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia happens when it extends into the stomach spread over the belly from the edges of the belly button area, so that the contents of that rupture move to one of those contents.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the stomach or from excision of it, and it occurs in these two species due to various causes: by impact, or through jumping, or through shouting, or due to lifting a heavy cause, or through labor.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this when caused by the expansion of the stomach is that it happens gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it's an abscess evenly within the ventral wall because the stomach compresses the contents.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of it is when caused by the section of the stomach; at the beginning it causes sudden intense pain; and it's an abscess quite different from what you see close to your side parts; and this is due to the movement of the contents, and his body in front of your waist.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes tears occur on the surface of the intestine's wall, and this type of hernia is called intestinal strangulated.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes they occur due to flatulence, and sometimes the hernia goes through a tear in the intestine, it gets stuck there, and this is a great danger for the patient, and sometimes they cause terrible and greater pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in treating the species of this illness, there is fear involved, so you should avoid surgery in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of performing that operation is to command the patient to return the hernia with their hand into its cavity if it responds to returning back, and then envelop them on their chest between your hands, and lift their ribs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the ligament which tightens the testicle ligaments above, make an incision across the entire length; and then place two folds of skin at that area according to how you need to open that section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the area according to the amount that it is possible for you, so that the patient's body can be opened.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape that fatty tissue which is left of the testicle ligament, in order to expose the white firm stomach from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you enter your finger into that which tightens the testicle, in that which is between white stomach, which is left of the patient's body, and in second stomach, and clean away from that adhesion which is behind the patient.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And indeed remove my hand from the area of the testicles to the front part, and do this with a white pincers on his side with my left hand, and lift the stomach up to the point of section; and command the minister to lift him up and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek among your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enclosed in the white pincers hard.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	May it be if you find any cause from him, then you pull that out to his belly leave it.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And indeed you take a needle in which there is a thick thread of seven strands, and insert it from the pincers down to the point that ends at the base of the testicles, which is below the navel; and then cut some ends so that they emerge through the needle where four strands come out, and then knot several of them into various shapes like a cross; and tie with that pincer about which we said leaves the area where the testicles end strongly from two sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And indeed wrap the ends of the strands and tie those tightly inside so that some of the vessels that nourish those cannot move any cause so that from here no abscess occurs.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another tightly for as long as the first one, three fingers away from your belly; and make these two tight spots on the pincers which are under where the testicles end, the size of what we said, and then cut everything else according to roundness, and take out his stomach.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And indeed cut at the spot under where the testicles end through the section where there is pain and healing as we have recounted in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And indeed apply wool submerged in oil, and pause at the wound; and apply that tight spot (and several spots of white pincers are cauterized, as we have mentioned nearby the insertion point for bleeding, where several spots can occur) and let that spot relax so it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the healing of his condition is delayed, then let salt water be applied, and pause on that spot where it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And indeed heal the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	About ventral hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, none has been seen that would be burnt during its treatment as we have done.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones would say that it is done in this way as we have recounted for the hernia that is on the side; which is to tie up the vessels near the section around that with ease for him; and then dry in the middle area around where the abscess opens, through which the vessels can fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some spots can rupture in the ankles as we have said, and let the place emerge.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not allow any cause of the intestines in the belly; and if they do, it is little; and return to them at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time with that continues, there is an opening in the pincers through which the intestine descends into the pincers; and this happens due to the extension of the pincers which are in the ankles as we have said, this cause is that the pincers are stretched, and nearby it becomes softened and the place becomes inflamed and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of him is with cautery as we have previously described in his case.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some spots are healed with iron according to this manner: which is that the patient sits on his two servants under your hands, and then dry the area of the abscess rupture around the insertion point up to the width according to the size of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And indeed strengthen the white pincers which are below the navel so that they are exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And indeed take the rod and pause it on the most prominent part of the pincers, and press it onto the bellybutton.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And indeed pinch both prominent spots on the tip of the pincers with the end of the rod, and adjust to the suture one of those onto the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And indeed remove the end of the rod, and do not cut through the pincers completely, nor extend the stomach, nor any other cause as I know it regarding the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And indeed heal that with the treatment of wounds, and when you cut those spots, clean that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; which is where the pincers are tightened and the rupture's prominence is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this location, which is closer to recovery.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	About softening of the navel region.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Some spots in the navel region of men tend to soften for this reason because the muscles that are within it become softer, and his care is neglected.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for him who treats the condition of this person to make him lie according to his two servants, and expose the entire navel which has softened over the natural navel; and then that he adjust two lips on the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, in the beginning of the treatment for excess in the liquid that has been softened, there are three or four boiled areas and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then proceed to open between the stitches; and then treat through the healing of the other wounds until it is healed, so that the pus drains.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter sixty-nine.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is condemned, yet for the sake of this document's content I choose to recall it; and there is no need for me to remember it merely because one might be asked about it during medical consultation, needing knowledge of its cure for whoever undergoes it. The other way is that we, out of necessity due to our offspring's juvenile needs for castration in various creatures, like with mares, dogs, pigs, and similar beasts, also require this procedure.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either through castration by resection or through incision and excision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case where it is done through castration by resection, the method of operation involves cutting the beast in seawater until its testicles soften and become inflamed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those near with your hand until they dissolve without exposing them to the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration done through incision and excision, you will have the beast and press on the sperm sac of its testicles with your right hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then attach the suspensory ligament, and incise over each testicle in one place until two testicles are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then drain the pus that you have excised from any wounds.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not allow anything on those of the penis except for a fine paste which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better which is done through resection, for a mild resection leaves no cause for the testicles that makes the beast desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter seventy.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of androgyny.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Androgyny in men occurs in two ways: the first is when there's a division within the space of the testicles, where it appears as if one half has feminine characteristics with hair on it.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some cases have urine that comes out through the space of the testicles, within the testicle's area.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women is a special case: it's that the male part on the belly is like two testicles of a man, almost completely identical in size and shape, as are the prepuce of men and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is for three types: two from men and one type from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you should understand that when you incise those tightened tissues so that the secretion of that is expelled, and then treat them with treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men from which urine comes out that is within the space of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter twenty-one.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On bleeding and prominent flesh due to feminine causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Bleeding that is mild occurs due to natural causes, it is well adjusted and should be observed; some instances are magnified in certain women to such an extent that they spread like in men and enter into intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then understand when you have the excess of bleeding with your hand or with a tool, to incise.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not conclude in incision, especially at the top of the cut area, so that no pus discharge occurs.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And for nascund flesh, which does not develop within the uterus and instead grows forward according to resemblance of a penis (for this reason some called it "caudal malaise"); so understand that we incise in the same way as bleeding, and treat that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter seventy-two.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of impotence.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Impotence occurs when the female genital is not perforated, or if it's slightly smaller.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either due to nature or by accident.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental occurs due to a caudal disorder that preceded it, and this is done through poorly adjusted flesh or through a thin or thick penis.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it can occur in the uterus' opening, on its sides, on excessive pus, or at the base of her, and forbid intercourse and pregnancy prevention, and prohibit menstruation as well.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And knowledge about that is made through observation of the physician, if the opening is noticeable, then it's obvious. But if it's not noticeable, then you search for that with your fingers or by touch.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if the opening is due to a thin penis, and it's close to both lips, then you guide and expand that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you press on the two lips of dust, and then place your fingers' tips under both of their lower parts.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her hips extended, and then you extend both lips as far as necessary so that that thin penis is broken and the opening can be opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And take wool, soak it in oil, place it over the incised area, and leave it there for a day to ensure that the cut does not heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the gallbladder is large and thick, then you should incise there under the liver or under a sheet of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the operation is for meat, then suspend that with a hook, and incise there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop the flow of bile and reduce pain, such as pepper, bile from a bear, and dragon's blood, mix them with hog's gall.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And administer an expansive lead cannula so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep it there for several days and apply lard oil.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And after this, use the other healing method of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some things happen in the main birth of other meats, and then you should incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for a pus-filled boil, then the boil that is in the main should not be treated against iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Title 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Title seventy-three: On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and of tail and of a red boil that occurs in women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the result of veins in the anus that continuously transport bile; when old hemorrhoids occur, they happen like this.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already explained in the division the species of those and their signs, and also indicate which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So it is said that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the late stage of pregnancy and do not appear painful, then there should be no treatment with iron for those.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	And those that are in the mother's opening where you can feel pain are the ones that need treatment.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you should make the woman lie down in bed and extend her thighs outwardly, or under rough cloth, and then incise those at the cheeks.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And after that, apply the flows of bile from one of the internal powders to reduce pain, such as pepper and similar things applied to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And after that, bathe her feet for an hour, then let it sit in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bile flows continue, then make her drink a decoction of sumac and dried plums and raisins, and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And after that take ground walnut flour, mix it with honey and wine and make a poultice of this over her back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bile is eliminated, then it's good; otherwise, attach her to two stools, and give breast-feeding with incisions on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and immerse it in colander juice or in the juice of arnical or in bear's gall in wine, then apply it to the area; and after that treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	If the stool is hard to pass, then you should incise that which appears to you from there according to what I have said in relation to piles.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Title 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Title seventy-four: On the perforation of a miscarriage during pregnancy.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The various species of boils that occur during pregnancy, such as painful boils, stone-induced boil, ulcers, abscesses, erysipelas, erythema, piles, and other boils.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these illnesses and their species and their signs, as well as the treatments for them in this section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know that I will speak about the treatment of boils in this treatise when they occur during pregnancy for those that have a tendency to heal naturally, and if you want to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So when you consider that the pain of the boil in its beginning is sharp to percussion and pus and fever, and sometimes it becomes red and if there's pain over it, then you should recognize the need for perforation of it, and treat it with whatever helps during its maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you do that, make the woman lie down on a board with two boards; recline her back against her hips and extend her thighs, let her knees be spread apart, place her arms under her buttocks and tie them loosely to whatever is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And when the midwife follows with the knife and administers the tool which opens the mother's opening, its shape will come about in those causes that are to be done later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this tool, fix it at the beginning of the mother's opening in the woman, and let what enters the mother from the instrument not be more than the beginning of her opening and spare the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And if the tool is larger than the beginning of her opening, then you should apply powders to the texture of her mother's opening so that it prevents the entire tool from entering her mother's opening.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should make the fluid inside the tool move down, with a whirl above it, so that the minister has the tool and turns the fluid until it opens her mother's opening.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the fever appears, and it is touched by your hand and is hot and wet, then uncover what you must release, you should remove the head of them with a sharp cut.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the fever is evacuated, then cover the wound with a cloth submerged in camphorated oil or in turpentine oil containing some medicinal properties; and place your foot on the section at the heel of the larger part.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place your hand on her (patient) and over the knee, woolen cloth submerged in water in which some pomegranates are boiling.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it is cured approximately two days with oil which, when mixed with this, should result in healing.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some baths are given to her (patient) and the wound is soaked in water that is mixed with honey, which should be used until she heals. Then, it returns to using oil again.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside her swollen belly, then do not allow any treatment with iron for her until you apply that which we have said in this section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Section 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in which manner they should medicate the embryos when it happens according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of normal birth by signs from her, and when you see a woman force to expel at the parts leave her and desire to smell the air, and on this she is stimulated by this which happens with her during labor, accelerating the movement of the embryo. Then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the movement of her on her own head, and the second one towards that or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you see those signs, then you know that her abdomen should be compressed by itself so that the embryo is gently expelled as it goes over its head. Then give the second one to her and eliminate those excesses with good digestion.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	It may happen that this part is not natural and unmanageable when the embryo is expelled on its own feet and her body is ahead of her head, and her feet are behind her, or one hand is by her belly,. or when her head is expelled and her hand is by it, or on her belly, and firmly she is turned over her neck, seeming like impossible figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	The necessary cause for the midwife is to be knowledgeable and discerning in all those causes, and avoid mistakes and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you every figure of these, and which instrument is used in each one according to what it signifies and its position.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is expelled on its head by normal effort, and it is strong on her (patient) causing difficulty for her part, and weakens her virtue. Then she should take this measure, or whatever women have under their beds, and evaporate her sweat with fennel seeds and with wet olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And it is necessary for the midwife to intervene between her (patient's) small intestine and appendix orifice. Or if she cannot do this, then dry that area with her hand where there is moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman so that it expels the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	It may happen if it does not expel, then you must make the woman sweat with fever caused by mustard and fennel in bed.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And it is necessary to command her (patient), and prepare her well. Then make her sneeze with mustard oil; and let her open her mouth and her nose for an hour, so that the fetus can come out quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both ends of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you should reduce those efforts gradually to facilitate it little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	It may happen if she does not follow the instructions. Then let the woman rest on one elbow and raise her legs from her body, then press the elbow to the ground; and make sure the woman does not fall due to this concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the efforts are not turned inside and the fetus is not expelled, then you should intervene by pushing the uterus of the fetus or lie it down on your hand with a cloth and pull it out evenly, so that it can come out easily.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	When the embryo is being expelled onto its own feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is expelled onto its own feet, then you should push those upwards and gradually turn the fetus, then make it equal and take one of its legs and spread those in little steps.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When it is expelled inside the thighs, then you should command her (patient) to push and make her sneeze with mustard oil, which will come out quickly if God willing.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it does not come out as we have recommended with mustard oil, then you should gradually return the fetus back inside according to its natural position, so that this will happen quickly with a little effort.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take mustard of saffron and of dissolved gum, and crush it thoroughly in the mortar for good crushing. Then pour this over her (patient's) sweat and the lower part of her belly's pus.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And it is necessary to have her squat in hot water so that she can reach her hips.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts leave your body and are softened, then have her (patient) be exposed to fumarole of myrtle and keep that area exposed to her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you perform the under-fumigation for an hour, then you have to make them sit on a chair, and subsequently make them sneeze and widen their mouth, and remove them from that position. Then apply light pressure to the lower part of their abdominal area, which makes them feel as if they had passed gas.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Positioning the person on their thighs and their chest.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the person feels like this, then you begin to place their smaller hands gradually; and have the woman sit up on her chest, and put their feet down, and those should be bent under them, and make sure their hands are comfortable.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually press on their abdomen, and gently remove whatever is causing the discomfort beneath their ears where it's prepared in the lower part underneath them.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the person doesn't pass gas, then take their feet and move them vigorously, and gradually press what is above the lower ribs inside where the body releases through the organs above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually place their hands and guide the person gently, commanding the woman to squeeze as soon as she feels like passing gas.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Positioning the person in a lateral position on one of their sides.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It's important to have the hand reduced for this, but if you can't reduce it there, then lift the woman and let her try.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she can't pass it that way, then have her lie on her back, and shake her thighs vigorously, and apply medicine from my remedies involving mucus.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has come about, then have her sit on a chair, and study the reduction of the hand, and guide her as naturally, make her sneeze and command her to compress herself as soon as she feels like passing gas.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Positioning the person on their chest, spread out their hands and the abdominal muscle of them is as wide as half their mother's.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Make sure the midwife holds onto the fetus' hand and gently turn that small part little by little, making it easy for them.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when they're equalized and this is done, then rest on the fetus' head that we've recommended using oil and mucus.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to cough gradually, and once you've done this, have her sit on a chair and command her that she should be leaning forward, and also tell her to squeeze herself; and make her sneeze under pressure.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus has been prepared for delivery on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother experiences horrors as this method dictates, consider it, and then you should insert your second finger into her until she has expelled the moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging over her face and chest, then you should insert that of the navel, so that it isn't retained and causes distress.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then gently push the fetus towards the organs inside until you pause it as soon as you can feel it, and command the woman to squeeze herself a few times, and he will pass gas almost immediately if God wishes.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses has occurred.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You should know that normal twins have felt movements, and sometimes they feel three or four, but this is strange and hard to detect; mostly these are due to natural causes and not illness.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count those, whether they are multiplets, one second, and are separated by ciphers, distinguishing them within the umbilical cord of each of those. And sometimes movements feel like passing gas as if it's a fetus passing naturally almost immediately, and there are some feelings due to unnatural pressure as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult for you to deliver, then proceed with the birth as we have said about non-natural figures, and treat those in this manner as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and makes her actions easy and skillfully, and in a delayed manner, and has been instructed according to every figure when she prepares herself leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering what is formed in the womb from embryos and those that abort.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some boils are formed in the majority one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, you should verify that with me whether a woman aborting conceives once again, and another all of them, which is caused by measurement of the glorious senses.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is to be as what's in the science of the midwife that she relies on that pale resemblance to it, and then stops herself according to what feels right.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled naturally, then you may use operation with your hand if necessary. Consider whether the woman is of sound health and is not affected by any accidents that could lead to her loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And when the woman is lying on her back on a bed with her head tilted towards her chest and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that [the patient] from both sides or tie him/her up in a bed, so that the body of the patient does not extend beyond the removal of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you wet the mouth of the mother with oil and salt water, as well as other medicinal herbs and seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and medicaments, and place her hand under the mother's abdomen, and settle her hand in the location where she will place her fingers into the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Position yourself conveniently in this manner: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered by turning it down its head, and once you've done that, place your fingers on the fetus's buttocks or neck, or mouth, or palate, or chin, or belly button, or other suitable locations near the back, or leave your hands at the armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the descent is below its legs, then place it on the knees, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And have your finger on the right hand, and hold the curve of it in that spot which is between the last two fingers of the left hand, and place your hand under the assistance and have your finger rest in one of those spots we've mentioned, until it reaches the final position.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep it in the position of where the other finger is, or the thumb if needed, so that there is equal pressure, and not an extension according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And soothe the entire area, so that the pain of the patient is relieved as when toothache occurs during the extraction of a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And apply in such a way that the extension is made smoother; and if any part of it is being held back, then ensure that the midwife applies oil to some of her fingers and uses them skillfully, rotating in those areas where it is being held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the fetus is outside, then the fingers should be moved into the location that is more suitable; and do this until the entire fetus is out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is in front of the other and it's not possible to reduce that by restraining the mother, then ensure that a cloth covers that; and extract that until all is out, and cut it or at the junction of the hand or on the side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this with the other hand as well and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or causes restraint during delivery, or it's in the position of water in front of the head, then ensure that you insert between the fingers a sharp instrument and cut open the head, or remove the water, or use an instrument known as "alundat", whose shape will resemble the shapes of other instruments near this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly do this if the fetus has a large head by nature: and ensure that you cut that with ligatures, or take that with an awl as we have said; and remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is compressed and restricted at the sternum, then ensure it is cut through where the moisture in the feet is dispersed.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	So if there's no complication and you don't experience pain during delivery, then ensure that you cut the head immediately as soon as it is feasible to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the intestines of the abdomen are protruding or in the case of water-bag delivery, then ensure that you pierces it where the moisture is present.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	So if the fetus is above its legs, then the pain during delivery will be slight and the direction of it towards the mother's mouth will also be slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	So if it's constricted in the abdomen and feet, then ensure that you remove that with cloth which you will wrap around your hand, and cut the abdomen and feet where the liquid is flowing from those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	So if the other limbs remain and turn the head, then the midwife will insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is opened, then place your hand in the pre-anal region, and around that place the head, and pull it with your fingers into the mother's mouth, and place one or two fingers there and pull it towards those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted due to an abscess causing pain in one, then ensure that it isn't excessively high from it; before this, apply fatty humid cause application.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages; and care for the patient with waters that soothe and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then as much as possible make it straight: and provide what we have said for living fetuses.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this isn't possible, then ensure that it is cut into pieces, and be extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you don't leave any cause for a second delivery.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And as you have completed all your operation, then provide the treatment we have discussed for the abscesses that occurred in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, then use收敛ing waters and apply the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have indeed seen a woman in her womb who had a dead fetus, and then about that fetus there was another pregnancy started, and the fetus was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him after a long period of time when an abscess occurred in his abdominal cavity; it inflated inside and then made an incision, started bleeding, and began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was summoned to treat him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal properly.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	So I applied some powerful healing ointment to him and operated on him several times, passing days each time, and operated on him again; and I was very amazed, for there was no bone in his stomach.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were from the bones of a dead person.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cleaned the wound, removed the flesh and bones from him, identified them according to their anatomical positions, and treated them in such a manner for a long time, cut off a small piece of his arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I didn't consider it strange at all, but rather that in this is knowledge and help for whoever the medical artisan administers care with their hands.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the forms of the tools that are necessary to remove the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape for turning in which the majority is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a stretcher on which the free are equalized, to which two strengths lie at both ends of two futs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Yet make this strength smoother for the sake of ease in handling, and have it made either of wood or of metal rod.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the thickness of each rod be two inches and the edge of both is one inch; and the length of each is a hand plus half. And in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments of these metal rods which are already fastened, where their length is about a hand plus a little less than that, and the thickness of each is about two inches, or a little less than that.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments should be inserted in the mouth of the mother so that they open when you turn the two prescribed strengths.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another shape similar to that, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of wood or metal rod according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Yet at the end of it there are two adjustments just as often, and the length of those adjustments is about a hand, and the thickness of each is two inches.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then place a cushion under her while she is hanging from her feet, and make an incision in the space between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand on the tool in such a way as you do with scissors evenly according to how much you want of the extraction from the mouth of the mother while you measure it, making it as you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the turning that they were said by the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Shape of the forceps, on which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Shape of the spoon-like tool where the large head is being held.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps with teeth at the end like before, as often as possible. Some times are made long like forceps according to this shape, as often as possible, where there are teeth like those of a rasp on which it is sharpened and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Shape of the spoon:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Shape of a cup having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a cup having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of the forceps where the teeth are closed on which the head of the fetus is held:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a spatula having two ends where the head is cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Shape of two spatulas lying side by side:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those tools are exercised, and when more of their species exist and they are prepared by the artisan, it is lighter for his operation and more suitable you should use the men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with those tools already that you must be equipped with, for the need of those is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained you should give birth, then command to the mother that she retain her breath, and make her sneeze with the condition, and hold your hand on her mouth and her nostrils, and if it comes out by this means, it's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an olla and pierce through the cover with a thorn and pause in that herbs blow into the mother's mouth, like calamus and rudis and nettle and camomile and scalding arabic and cinnamon wood and santaular.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the olla, and pause that above the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a pipette from a gourd in the mother's mouth, and keep that inside until the vapor goes into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze in this manner as we have said, and the second child comes out quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment does not take effect and is not effective, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of saffron or in high altitude vegetable soap mixture, and introduce that into the womb and make the second child come out by that way. And when she has found it, take it little by little slowly. If it sticks to the mother's preon, then introduce her hand as we have recommended, and when she finds the second child, pull it out little by little according to its position so that the mother does not fall from the violent pressure.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before it is laid on the right and left sides for easy turning.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust to the amount of suction, one that would obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medicine from the sea using herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If not removed by all the causes we have recommended, then ensure you do not exhaust yourself in the iteration of abstraction, but instead allow what is emitted from you to the mother's mouth lies on the female thigh, and then treat that with grease and tetra-formula; which one will dissolve that around a few days and become free.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When you relieve yourself, it raises the bad smell to the head and stomach, and this scents the disease; and then ensure that sub-smokes and suitable things are administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Such as the ancients already use sub-smoke of nettle and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Forming an instrument with which the female is sub-smoked, you must retain her menstruation and second periods:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of wool or reed.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle end is placed in the corner and the wide end above the fire, and the sub-smoke is placed on the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that so that the sub-smoke is consumed and repeats itself.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Regarding the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Mothers often neglect and do not perforate their infants' butts, which are sensitive and plump.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then advise the midwife to puncture with her thumb that cheek; if not, puncture that one with a sharp needle, and ensure it does not touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place over that wool saturated in vinegar and oil; and then treat that with grease while it is cooled.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it's plump, then leave a tube in the mother for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is defecation in the butt due to consolidation of pustule or abscess; then ensure that this consolidation is incised and treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the treatment of the fistulas that trouble you.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the left side, close to the anus, are small and rough, causing trouble near or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or marks.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as that lump becomes old and erodes due to the whitish watery moisture or pus, some of these sores sometimes occur from such fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those that penetrate are known because they emit from them through expulsion and due to windiness; some of these sores cause the mother's discomfort during expulsion, and severely emit from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Some of those fistulas have sores penetrating into the bladder, and into the thigh region; some of those penetrating into the space between the thighs and into the navel region.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And for the type of penetrating fistula that goes into the anus and does not penetrate, you should insert your finger in the anus, and introduce a subtle stick made of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no obstruction.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	And if there is obstruction in that, then insert that subtle lead or horse hair stick into it where you feel the thread or the hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that throughout or do not proceed with any cause of expulsion, worm, or windiness as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now attend to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the thigh region, then this signifies her urine discharge from that and prohibition to do so until the area where she has medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the space between the thighs or into the bone and is accompanied by pain in the veins, then this indicates that the thread passes here through if there is no obstruction inside the bone and pain in the veins; and that she has pus continually; and that it doesn't matter with that medicine treatment, nor does it consolidate with grease.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas is not the cure of everything, and the treatment of these consists of labor and diligence from medical doctors over which they are imposed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And for those that do not penetrate and are not old, you should expect healing with iron as I will already recommend, and what I have previously said.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the mother should have her hands under her knees and lift her ribs within them, her thighs inclined towards her belly, and introduce a lead or reed thread if there is obstruction in the fistula. You should know where through the thread passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels like the mother around the neck, then advise you to insert your finger tip in the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel through your finger that the thread has already been discovered penetrating, or anything else between your finger and that lump or flesh, then you can definitely know that this is penetrating; thus do not work on it, as there is no treatment for it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some might say that it is healthy in certain old men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which youth is expected in them, you should make subtle incisions according to the size of the fistula as described earlier, and insert that flame into the fistula until it touches the wound; and then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those muscles attached to the fistulated area resemble a quill feather.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with heat in bandages wrapped around it until all those muscles that are stuck recover. And also treat that area with medicines to regenerate and strengthen the flesh, if it is healed, it's good; otherwise, at another time no treatment will be healthy after this period.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if it enters inside and does not penetrate the one you mentioned which is in the anus, and between that and a wound that is gradually filled with flesh or fat, and makes an incision at the site of the fistula in the area where it is on the surface of the skin, then dry the anus from the beginning of the fistula, then dry this thing as well, and ensure that the drying reaches the spot where the tip of the fistula exits. Then the fistula is liberated and there's nothing left.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then properly treat those fistulated muscles that are similar to a goose feather and do not damage any of their parts.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is pus flow between you and your operation when you touch those muscles, then let it be, and of the pus use a minor instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine; fire-cauterization makes good cuts: this is adjustment for those muscles that are adjusted, and removal of pus through drying up of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with bandages or in the case of cuts, within where the wound is cleaned up, and later on treat the wound with hard flesh medicines to regenerate and strengthen it.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these are medicines in which there is coagulation and drying; once this happens, it is restored and healed, and you do not fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already reached into the inside of the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert what you said in the anus and ask about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you touch the fistula and between you and it is gradually filled with fat or flesh, and it approaches penetration, then this is not an operation on him but according to faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This reason is to administer one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or dry up that until you achieve the fullness of its cavity so that it becomes possible for you to insert some tools and treatment can proceed; do not introduce fire in drying processes lest you enter into the wet area containing the wound, and act according to your desire and intention on the patient's inner body. And then treat that as we said which makes the injured area strong; or extend that gradually and remove that pus that is being dried up within near the anus as we have said, either by fire or with another sharp tool, and then properly treat those fistulated muscles that are in the drying area where you can perform scraping. And then exert yourself to restore the entire wound through drying processes, and if the pus areas above are not consolidated, and continues to open up the fistula at the passage of the anus, and produces a little pus on the patient's inner body.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some operations on the fistula are completed according to this method: when you insert the needle into the fistula, and around the anus near the surface of the body in relation to the rectum, and at the edge of the anus, then takes on a needle with perforated tip, which is like a sewing needle according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And then insert the needle into that bandage covering three needles or around them; and later on insert the needle into the fistula until you achieve its fullness.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates near the inside of the anus edge, then you pull out that thread as you inserted what you said in the anus; and remove the tip of the thread and adjust both ends at once, strengthen each one, let this be for a day or two, and when more deeply penetrates the flesh, strengthen it so that those muscles lie between the two ends of the needle and fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you are prepared for, but rather from inside where it's not accessible to you, so do not enter into the wound; and later on treat that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of cutting a spine on the one that is cut by the fistula: the curvature of which is rather sharp and the other part is not, so as to not enter what is unnecessary, just like this.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing hemorrhoids where pus flows in at the opening of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are in two ways, where they resemble charcoal inside the anus or they are like raisin fat outside.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those they are small and large, the pus that flows from them at times is uniform, it's a mass, and it's within or outside the anus, and at its ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Those are the ones where in small periods of moisture, they may have yellowish water or a little blood mixed with blood continuously, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The treatment for one that is inside the body is to command the patient to stay and squeeze it until the bile starts to come out and the emmoroids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	So you stretch yourself and hold onto your nails or what you have there under your thumb, and then proceed to prick those that should be pricked by their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the nails are not held in such cases due to their moisture and softness, then take those under a rough cloth or wool or felt, and remove those by your fingers, and then proceed to prick those near and grind some powders over them near the pricking; or cauterize those according to what is previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with the other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not allow evacuation, then treat the patient with a mild cautery using a cautery that has a slight bite, and wash them with that water which is in the bile that facilitates evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the emmoroids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight; you should take those with your thumb or those with nails, prick them, and treat those with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And to the one who has an incision, do as follows when you are to sew them: take a thread wrapped around it and insert that in a needle, then remove the emmoroids from their places above, and make the thread enter the needle in the root of the other part; wrap the two ends of the thread around the part laterally; strengthen the emmoroid with firm tension, then pull out the needle and leave the thread.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and let one of those remain unclothed, for that way the excess blood will flow from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place over the anus a cloth soaked in rubbed oil or in wadding; then have that rest on the bile and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that remain until it heals; when it is finished, treat those with greases or with other remedies until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Cysts occur due to discharge or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and do not respond to that medicine, then you should drain them through the tip of the needle or through your thumb until they become moist and have been bathed with pus above it, which prevents consolidation; and treat those until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you drain those through the abundant pus, in the first instance when they become inflamed and are irritated; and treat those until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	For the treatment of abscesses, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that abscesses are the key, and not otherwise to be found resembling a tip of a violin, and they occur throughout the body and especially in the limbs and feet, so for those with pain, you should guide them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And you should know that it should be pricked with what is inside the circuit of the key, and held with tweezers or nails, and its root should be removed; then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is previously mentioned in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Verumca's prominence is a small sharp circular fistula that occurs on the surface of the body, and cysts often appear in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for treatment, you should stretch that or prick it with a needle or thread until it heals.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with an acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And when they are eradicated on the inside and outside using the tool I directed you to use.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Formica is a small prominence or large cystic formation on the body surface that often appears in pregnancy, and when you touch it, it feels like being bitten by an ant, and it occurs around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And for its treatment, you should take a needle from the tip of a dog or a needle from a snail, and make it strong, place that over the ant until it contains the circle around the body parts; then rotate your hand with the needle until you prick what is in the circuit of the ant, and keep that at the center of the flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle or iron according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Take the part above the needle that is drawn in delicately, quietly (which means not perforated), wrapped around it so that from below it gives the appearance of having been shaved and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was said in advance for cauterization of anthills in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the shape of the instruments that you administer to give cautery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some are made with cautery from silver or tin or melted iron or hammered metal; and some are made with those small and large instruments according to which ones you administer, so that the one used in treating small children should be small. And of those whose anus is sore or painful, the cauteries from those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The method of treating large and few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the catheter above which the bag is tied is wide according to this method; and as for placing the bag, it should be done in the same way as necessary.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the pus coming out, which invades the anus, should be sound (if not opened), with a gentle touch; and in one side of the buttock there are two punctures, and on the other side one puncture, and the width of the puncture according to the thickness of the nerves and somewhat thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medicines for the bladder of beast or sheepskin are placed, and the size of your hand is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be punctured with needle-like points as it rotates; and if the space between the points is the size of what was said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert a strong, raw faeces into those points that are the size of ten faeces, or about that size; and adjust it to each point. And when you place the bag in the patient, straighten it in the head of the catheter between two marks with strong constriction, and adjust the catheter to each point: The better quality of adjusting is that you fill the bag with medicine according to the tolerance quantity of the patient; and be careful not to make too long or too short.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And have the patient lie on their back, elevate their legs and place one of their buttocks under which is where people or a pillow would be; then smear the end of the cautery with oil, or with egg white or with fenugreek or semilla mixture; then insert that into the anus with ease, then let the minister take the bag and squeeze it while doing so forcefully until everything inside the catheter is expelled; then remove the catheter and have the patient lift their buttocks to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it into urination, keep as much as possible; and if you let that happen for the whole night, it is better later in adulthood.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you adjust that in the patient's stomach problems and the urination of them takes time, then you will repeat the cautery until they are cured.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or boils in the anus, then let the catheter be delicate and gentle, like those catheters which children use.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Regarding the treatment of infections.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already mentioned in the division of treating infections what was suitable for free, and I say like this, the treatment of those with my own means and with medicines according to their capacity.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that infections are varied according to the place where they occur and according to the location on which the lesions attack.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which spots appear in infections can be as follows: due to the rubbing of rough clothing, or cutting of space or bone, or hitting with a lance, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar from causes that lead to such spots.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the infections that occur in body locations can be such as scalp infection or neck infection or foot infection or abdominal infection and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some infections because I pause that reasoning and rule for other infections.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I start with simple scalp infections, whose memory of compounded ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And it is said that when a simple scalp infection occurs and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to rubbing or from a similar cause, and the pus has already been drained only until now, it is large infection and you fear that the patient might develop an abscess later; in this case, you apply cold and bloodletting on the cephalic area immediately, do not delay this treatment; and remove blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other contraindication prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood that is coming out from the infection is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let bloodletting be opposite to where the infection occurred; and take care of the patient against overeating, thirst, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	And if you prohibit any cause from the start, then reduce food intake and do not come close to meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause about the infection, if it happens that an abscess forms, apply heat with rubbed oil or in a drink where it is antiseptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are sure of an abscess forming, then pause about the infection, if it is recent in its blood and air hasn't changed that powder which I recommend to use slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, then pause about certain ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the infection is large or it's due to cutting of space and similar causes, and the patient's lips are not closed with pins, then adjust those with stitches according to what I recommend for stitching them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the infection has already penetrated through bone and skin, but it's not retention of the patient just a small suspensorium, then incise that and treat the infection with medicines until the meat is restored at the place where pus was present, and instruct the patient to eat hard foods: cabbage and beans, similar to them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find decomposition in the intestine and it does not stick to the bone, then you cut out all of this pulp and remove it, and then treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these diseases it is an artery or vein from which the flow of blood might occur, and it cannot be separated by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that part not being cut off, then you cut through that artery, or tie it; and if necessity compels that what we have said does not correspond, then you cauterize until the blood is cut off.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these diseases are simple and small, then their cause is minor; scatter this powder over them, let it harden before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the way to prepare this powder is as follows: take oil from one part of the wax tree, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished ashes; mix them thoroughly and sieve them, then fill the wound with it, apply pressure for good compression while it rests on that area, let it coagulate due to the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And bind that with dry dust and leave it, do not remove it while it's still like this until the medicine has fully taken effect inside of it so that it heals.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes when you don't have wax and dragon's blood in the present, do this alone with a cautery.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And perform this surgical operation in large wounds when you have to lay it over those and tighten them, especially fresh wounds on their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then it is not appropriate to place this powder in its usual position, but rather treat those as we said before, by laying several digested ointments over them, or by placing some flour polishes from the dough with water and honey until they form a paste; then treat those with another treatment until they heal.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if it happens that you encounter a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract this from the wound.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I prescribe the treatment for skull fractures in what is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	And regarding the diseases of the throat.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	And if the disease occurs in the throat, then there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple skull ailment.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	And if already the nerves of the throat have been cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, not in its natural place but to avoid treatment that causes violent constriction, as with zinc and saying it's corrosive and resembles their nose in the nerves and constricts them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything on the wound that would cool entirely, for the substance of nerves is cooled and their continuation is at the neck, which is the center of all parts of the body.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with boiled water or oil rubbed or un-rubbed, thyme when washed with boiled water, and other salves according to this method, and moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you perform stitches or tighten the lips of it, and then treat that with dust until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if the wound has depth or occurs at the lower part of the paste, then pierce it in the deepest point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if an artery has already been cut in the wound and blood flow is obtained, then separate or dry that, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity compels to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you have cut the tendons of the leg or all, and the veins of the throat are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound around stitches on the bone of the leg without touching that; make it equal to that and return it to its natural shape, and bind it with good tension for several days; and treat it with salves in which there is constriction and excitement until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	And if the disease has already affected the bone, then you prick it, and if there are pieces of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; for what does not adhere to you, leave it until the wound heals, and make its removal easy.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the disease is recent, then scatter this recommended powder over it.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if in the disease there is formed an abscess, then treat it with what will bring back its memory in its capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	And regarding the diseases of the throat or of the lymph nodes when formed between the shoulders and occurs in the space, under the arm, at the neck, or on the lymph nodes.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it's an ax blow or a club hit, and you assess the depth of the wound, then if there is wind passing through when the patient is breathing; you should know that the disease is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the disease is recent with its blood, then you place this first hour's powder on it, without binding it so that the blood does not get trapped at the depth of it and returns to the heart causing the patient discomfort, but place this attractive ointment on it, remove it two washes the next day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at your disposal, then you press against the opening of the wound with your finger to allow it to drain out any moisture; and make the patient lie over the wound so that what is in his body can flow properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If it has been three days or more since the wound was treated and no convulsions, heart failure, nor constriction occur in the patient, and if you use other good treatments for him, then you can conclude that the wound is saved; and from there treat it with warm baths and within another treatment where it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the patient's recovery is justified, and if it has already opened up continuously, then you can conclude that a fistula has been formed; therefore, treat it accordingly from its source.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a surgical incision or a cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the leg, then treat it with what follows from suture, if it's large, or with powder, if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already undergone extraction in the bone, and you have cut out pieces from him, then press on the wound and pull to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separate, then wait until the wound heals, for extraction of them becomes easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds occurring in the other limbs during treatment, it is similar to what we have been discussing.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or mixed.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large ones, some cuts involve the intestines or nerves of the intestine, so that their introduction and suturing is more forceful and more delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made by another method, and it's clear that the reduction of them is more difficult, so you must take care not to let their introduction to their place wait too long, for when it does, it gets swollen which makes the internal substance hard.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is mixed, where it's not difficult to reduce the intestines, as it is in the two species mentioned previously.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four methods for suture of the abdomen, yet two types of stitches are common and suitable for sutures of other wounds in the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two others are specific stitches that communicate with other wounds, yet however they are more specific in the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you to have every exposition and declaration for each case.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and a part of the intestine has been displaced by it, making its reduction difficult, then this situation occurs in one of these two ways: either due to the size of the disruption as we have said, or when there's swelling on the intestine due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when it's like that, you should soften the area by soaking a piece of cloth with hot water or taking something into hot water and letting it soak in it, along with juniper, parsley, and herbs, then burying this around the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some cuts do this because they have restrictions, and it's better to use hot water alone in resolving swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you've resolved the swelling, then you moisten the intestine with water in which herbs and mallow are boiled, for thus it becomes easier to handle the internal substance of him due to a few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it's convenient for the internal substance of him with this treatment, then divide the disruption by using a small tool that has needles inserted into it.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it's appropriate that it's not dried out, and there should be no necessity for it to dry due to lack of need or deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the tool, if its form suits:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is rounded and sharp, the other part is not acute, its tip is subtle, but not as subtle as a needle, being slightly blunt up to just a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and sticks out of the intestine, you should make its reduction according to its natural form, in its proper place, if it's possible over that, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the disruption is large, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, place their knees higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place the head and chest higher than the rest.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then hold your understanding and consideration for this situation so that the part where there's the wound is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should apply this to large wounds and to mixed wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, use what you've prepared and have someone among your most experienced do it, so they can handle the disruption fully with their hand and adjust the layers of tissue, and then uncover from that to this one where there might be some cause for another type of suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: one that takes the needle, or a count based on the width of the wound; and then leaves from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or another way you don't insert the needle into both ends of the thread, at both ends of the bandage which is left in the middle between the parts inside them, so that it penetrates this part; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the bandage, forming four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And tighten the needle twice in the loop of the thread, and make a few stitches at both ends simultaneously, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition; and smooth out the thickness of that one and place another needle in that same spot, and adjust that stitch like you did with the first needle; and don't stop doing this until all the contraction of the wound has been filled within the needles.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be both smooth and fine, for fine needles make a gentle incision into the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to thread in the chain, so that they should be of medium size combining subtlety with thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And don't let the needle be inserted at both ends of the thread near each other, so that the flesh is not cut too gently and the wound does not rupture in front of its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the stitches for the wound to not be prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And make the ends of the needles pierce so they do not penetrate too far into the patient's skinfold; place powdered substances from all sides over the stitches, with their ends on the needles; leave them there until you know that the wound has already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of needle stitches are suitable for small wounds, up to one or two needles in the stitch around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second stitch is similar: and you should perform this stitch with all four ends, of the thread and both ends of the cord, in one go, using a needle whose thickness is equal to that of subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that half of the part you started with, so that the thread retracts into the other half of the pus-containing part, so that the stitch follows another stitch of fabric where the fabrics are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch for the thickness of the thread's length.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is what men know.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch, I healed the wound that had happened to a man in his abdomen where he was wounded by a knife, and it was the rupture of a major wound of about one palm's size; it lay between the intestines around two palms from my belly location, and it was the break in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the intestine had been brought out through the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in about fifteen days or so, and I treated it until it healed; and then that became fluid with the passage of months, and he recovered according to his conditions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; and by miracle of fire, which I did not treat with ointment, which was in a place where the ointment could not be found nor any medicine, but I applied to the wound like twice a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will tell you two kinds of stitches according to the report of Paulus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the stitch of the thread, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then as the needle pierces into the thread and enters those knots according to straightness and length across the whole body, leave the end of the cord where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate at the other end the inner part from the outer part in the other end of the thread.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then make another passage in that middle end of the thread from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the end of the cord that is at this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end of the inner part from the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration of yours reach the cord where you made that penetrate into it at the end of the thread which is in the part inside him, so that all this penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And proceed from this side, then bite that at the end which is from the cord in the other side, and pull out the needle of the thread that penetrated it, then reduce that into that thread and bite the end of the cord which is on the other side at this side of the thread; and pull out that from the thread which belongs to him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and another, and do this another time between one another until you sew all that is outer according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the total of this way of stitching is that you sew on the stitch of tissues where you sew the skins, so that you sew the cord once from the part of the end of the thread, and leave that other passage until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second own stitch you call Gualia, and this is according to his report and what he recommended, it is that you sew that according to likeness as some surgeons do, so that they add all parts to their corresponding part for nature; and apply one extremity of yours and the end of the thread to the other end of yours, and this is done as I have advised you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And when you place the needle at the end of the thread towards the outer part, make it penetrate into the inner part in that sole, and leave two ends of the cord; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two ends of the cord.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those nodes, and make each node from the inner part penetrate into the outer part in two ends of another body that is opposite to the latter.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than common superficial suture, it is a suture that recalls a previous memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the treatise of Guala.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if they were to say so, abdominal suture is corrected with two needles. So you would enter this into each node with a thread, and start with the needle from where you should proceed, making that thread penetrate on the other side as per the suturing method of those that equalize the organs.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, then sutureting it becomes more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgement of medical treatment for plague is judgment on the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	That is why, when you have caught the plague at its early stage before the air alters that part of it, and return the intestine and cook that part properly, then apply over that place carnal powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then apply over that place some ointments which are in your possession that harden and dry out the threads, and become compact; and treat it likewise as treatment for other plagues within where it becomes healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have these medicines at your disposal, then apply over that place for a while, as it begins to get dry and congeal, and alternate those two treatments per day, just as you were taught, within which it becomes healed, so that you do not need other medicine in similar conditions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the plague might spread to the main limbs, then immerse lion wool in oil of a good quality, or in strained oil, and apply this over the area between the armpits and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or decay in his intestines, where these treatments do not help, then apply this with a black stick made of a stictic substance, and even more so if the pus has reached inside the intestine and is causing an exit to penetrate into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what comes from the large intestine is a lighter pus for healing than what comes from the smaller intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And healing is difficult for the intestine which is called "gegunu", as it does not receive healing from plague that affects it entirely; this is due to the large number of veins that are in it and the magnitude of those in those areas, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what is being treated of the plague is the skin, and you have caught it recently, reduce that according to your rectitude to where you return the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it has passed to the space of the patient and turned into red or black, then you should strengthen that with thread over the area that is degraded by him, so that blood flows from the wound, as there are veins and arteries in the skin.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert what is another part of this ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the part left of the wound on the patient's side, so that your concern about his condition is alleviated by the healing process and elimination of pus from the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recollection of plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and is slight, then it's possible that healing can occur in some individuals. As I saw this person who was stricken with an abdominal plague due to a lance thrust, and the plague was old, causing fistula formation, and loss of appetite and flatulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursued the treatment of this already realizing that it was not confined in the healing of him, but rather found out where it will heal and the area will become consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the place already consolidated, took pity on the misfortune that befell him in his stomach; and did not suffer any from this unfortunate event and disrupted his normal eating and drinking habits. Rather he engaged in bathing and exercised according to what was prescribed for him.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And it is already said by some experienced individuals that when a plague occurs in the intestine and is slight, then follow this method: you should take large caps; and adjust both sides of the wound's lips; place a cap that fits over the wound's lips; so when it takes on these and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of him, which sticks and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another cap near the first one, and do not cease from doing this by placing caps one next to each other according to the quantity of the entire plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and clean the plague; remove those extra caps within which the intestine heals; and do not harm the patient from any damage.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be bound with a thread made from animal intestines attached to you, since it's more durable; and you take the end of these intestinal threads, and if they're clean, then place this end in your thread, wrap it up, and insert this thread into needles and dust it on that part of the intestine, then reduce it during the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This method of stitching with needles is merely another way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the wound is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, then at that point there is only refinement rather than healing, and not total recovery for it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	For the cure of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all wounds and abscesses when they fester and become ancient, and result in a溃疡 (ulcus), which does not consolidate and bleeds for the entire time and is not excised, then wherever it might be, universally it's called a fistula and we call it that pus.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A true fistula is a narrowed, hard, white lesion at which there is no pain and to which the body's response is as if it were in response to pus; for this reason, that ulcer is referred to as a "pus root", meaning penum.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in wet ulcers, which bleed; and slightly dampness is excised within several hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is a spot, it's small, it's thick, and it's subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, as I said about wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed or is not on naked flesh, it is this way due to one of these reasons: among which one reason is due to lack of blood within the body; or due to malice; or where between them and their labia is thick flesh preventing the natural formation of flesh; or due to a pus-like condition; or because that ulcer itself contains poison and the material intertwined with it has bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient in treating it; or when corruption occurs in the area, and there's pestilence; or due to properties of the region, for instance at Saragossa where digestion of illnesses is difficult, and pus healing is delayed by nature in that part of an abscess; or if there's bone, or bones within them.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Having shown all those causes, and the signs of them and their treatment with medicine in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus, I will teach you about the treatment of a fistula which is performed through surgery with your hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that come from major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the throat, or intestine, or bladder, or along any of the ribs, or a part of the spine, or near any joint made up of bones. And these give proximity to the main limb and its resemblance.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so among these fistulas that are performed this way, they are from illnesses with difficult healing and not receiving a cure, and the treatment of it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there's some fistulas whose depth doesn't reach the places that were mentioned, and you hope for its healing and rely on it, and want to understand it, then take a risk with iron or steel, and if the fistula is in line, and you investigate this within you.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate this with a subtle lead; since lead within its own body is lighter and you should straighten out the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula contains toxic pus, it's not within your ability to mark this upon it with steel.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	And then cleanse the opening through your openings, since the moisture that you use to cleanse this goes to the other openings and their discharge.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire precisely, according to the way that you can possibly know if there's bone or nerves within it, and whether the length of the fistula is distant or near, or if this is a fistula with multiple openings which is all above your total strength, through your questioning, through which you question the patient, and where you apply pressure on the area with your hand, considering the significance and causes associated with abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And once you have assessed all those causes at the station truthfully, then proceed with the treatment according to confidence: it is that you now consider if this fistula appears nearby or in a distant location, far from joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I've told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then you dry out the fistula according to what was said about its birth before, and remove whatever is in that filtration and corrupted flesh, and whatever has grown within the opening of the tissue or parts alike, and treat it internally until it's healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of distant depth and is in line, then make sure to insert into it as far as possible, and thoroughly remove all its corrupted flesh; and then administer hot bandages soaked with sharp medicines, and introduce these within the fistula which you have understood through steel.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this in some places within where the sharp medicine will corrode everything that's rotten within the fistula's inner flesh.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh where it has been healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it's not healed by this method, then you should cauterize it according to what we've recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of fistula is bone and you must confirm this, then inquire about it and dry out the fistula according to what we've recommended, unless there's no reason for vein or nerve issues or main limb problems as we've said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the lung is exposed and there is any corruption or darkness within it, then you must insert something into it so that the corruption can be expelled entirely; and soon after care for it until the flesh within it becomes healthy.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and the blood is still dark like this, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you uncover it again thoroughly and make the necessary measurements and adjustments to its structure at the end of your work, and soon after restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, good; and otherwise, then you will know that that corruption is deep within the body, which could not be reached, and so in that case there is nothing for you to do but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the lung is corrupted and small, or if it's within reach for you to pull it out, then you will pull it out using delicate forceps that are suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if they are moist bones, then thoroughly make the extraction of all of them, and from those leave no cause undone by your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If it causes you any contradiction due to moisture, and in their operation there is no fear or mistake, then cut those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If there is no preparation for the bones to be there at your time, then pause on the wound so that the wound itself heals completely inside that part which is around those bones and muscles, and keep the wound from being consolidated, and ensure that the section you have cut during your operation remains restrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Waxing, if you fear, pause on the surface immersed in a warm oil bath, or on the surface immersed in an Egyptian unguent, or with one of those vertigo remedies; when those ligaments are ready, and the bones have been separated from them by cutting, and where there is no harm.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it is a large bone such as the rib or leg or resembling those, and what from him is corrupted is only the flesh of him, then remove that with resio just behind where that darkness and corruption is contained, and soon restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	And if what from him is corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has already reached to the marrow of the bone, then it's necessary to close that, and to insert everything into the place where the corruption was contained, and soon after heal it until consolidation occurs.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you do as an example and with assistance for when you operate on someone in their leg, so pause there to exemplify and assist your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Treat a young man around the age of 30 years old, who has pain in their leg, and upon examining the divisions internally, it is found over the material inside the body where this material has reached to the leg, and this material is pus with large abscesses, and do not attribute the cause to external factors.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend the time for that through the mistake of doctors until the abscess bursts, and remove all the liquid contents, and his treatment is soon paused until the change becomes fistulated, and make cuts in the liquid orifices which were all dripping with pus and moisture from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then I treated multiple times over two years, and did not know in those regarding the art, when I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the change in him and the contents that flowed from those wounds over a large area; and already his body of that man was completely stiff, and the color of him was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a needle into one of those wounds and conducted it to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I soon examined all the wounds and found that they reached from all parts of the body.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I healed myself and inserted onto one of those wounds into which I discovered a part of the bone, and found that corruption, and it was earthy and corrupted and degraded; and already it had corroded a part of the body through which it penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And I saw that which was discovered by me and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I knew that it was not in the bone but that corruption which had spread and congealed, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the healing of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondly about the initial discovery, and found continuous corruption to the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I healed what appears from that corruption to me, and then I made preparations for treating and restoring him, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered on the other occasion and did not cease to gradually cut away little by little from the bone particularly and made the restoration of him, but it was not restored until I cut around one palm of him, and he extracted up to his marrow, and soon afterwards restored him with medicines, and it consolidated only slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on this section of him but for the position of his lungs and for the lack of endurance and fear that comes from him in all hours due to excessive evacuation, which caused a bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore healing is through total recovery, and nothing replaces hard flesh; it's good to arrange him in his own body and return his health; and he is guided by his own decisions, and does not oppose him in walking or harm him in any case.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the disease is located in the heart area and has been cut, then follow this method: you must pull that one until the second according to this manner. You should take hold of that substance firmly at the tip of that prominent part and command someone else to extend it fully; put a thicker woolen cloth than the first layer on that substance, then press that woolen cloth against the place left by the cut, extending its tip so that you pull the flesh towards those parts. Lay bare the flesh over the area where you want to make a cut so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stake or table in such a way that when you do this, the saw is not allowed to cut into the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And find out that the cutting edge is placed gradually over the small corrupted area. If it's in the recess of the corrupted bone and doesn't appear with its manifestation to touch, force another cut on him.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before one part continues to the other, and corruption is in the middle or at a part of him, then you reveal flesh from all parts completely; then place a stake here, then press the saw on the first part where corruption is inside which should be continuous with the cutting line of the second part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the cut according to the location of the corruption, even if it's small, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, penetrate that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then not on his reason but in between them.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if corruption is in the armpit of the hand or chest, it's very difficult; however, find out where the corruption appears to you in what manner, and open that area, show that area according to every disposition which is possible to you, and make each incision rectify your own way when it does not oppose you veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the best tools and saws to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their subtlety and size, and their hardness and their rarity; therefore find out that you prepare for every type of operation a suitable instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that operation means to you about the type of tool you need; when among you is great study and long and knowledge of the methods in this art, and testimony from methods of diseases, as then you already had for yourself to use what is convenient according to him of tools for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will show you at the end of this chapter the number of tools which you will use according to those which proceed from among them, as your prohibition which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of a large other saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a rasp:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The tip of this rasp should have the shape of the tip of a star key, and its points should resemble those of a star-shaped point.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is only necessary that in that place the tips of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or have a large open mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of larger razors:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of smaller razors:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of diagonal razors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another differently made saw: it should have an arch above the pus and the sharpness of its iron blade, and the member that makes it descend diagonally is made.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a razor with a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-end razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small razors resembling spiders' webs:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of incisors in which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incising tool; this resembles a rasp, and its tip is like a saw blade. It exhibits in various locations along the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a rasp which conforms to the ratio of that one through which holes are made in the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its tip is triangular and has an acute end.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, and similarly find all the causes that we have said about razors, incising tools, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the tip incision and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends may be due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or because you have treated that corruption with the medicines and recovery does not occur, or sometimes the corruption spreads from its own body without any external cause. In such cases, find out that you must incise that part within this where the disease has reached, so that the patient may die from this illness or from a malice which is worse than the misfortune of his body.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of the one to whom it happens is that the limb becomes black inside where there's a burn, or you place the darkness inside where the heat enters that part of the limb causing it and takes over their entire body; and therefore proceed with this treatment on them.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if it's caused by the impact of some poisonous causes such as from a sea scorpion or a pufferfish or a snail and its like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut into the finger and do not allow space for the corruption to enter your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it reaches your hand, then you cut that from the wrist's bend, and do not allow space for the corruption to enter so that it takes over in the elbow of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you have to deal with that, then cut into the arm at the bend at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes elsewhere around the bend, then in that case, it is the death of the patient; and administering another cause for this in treatment amounts to a large amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, do the same for the chest when corruption reaches the part of the chest, then you cut into that near one of the ribs.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it extends to the middle of the chest, then you must cut out the entire chest.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If the corruption invades the liver, then you should cut into the abdomen at the junction of the liver.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already invaded the liver, in that case there's no cure but to let go, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting into the limb or squeezing it is that you strengthen one band in the area where you want to cut, and leave which behind. And place another band over the spot; extend your assistant with one band on the left sides left out, and extend your assistant with another band on its side; then separate the flesh that's between two bands in such a way that there is a small space laterally so that all the flesh is exposed; and proceed to cut or squeeze it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover that with a cloth of all sides so that it doesn't touch the spot there, and bring about for the patient an adjustment wound and a scalded blister.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if during your work you encounter blood from sweat when you operate, then you apply the cautery gently, or place some sweat-enhancing powders on it; and proceed to return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And bind the affected limb with a bandage to a suitable location, and treat that so that it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I urge you to understand this that I found in someone's chest, this incident which I share with you, the one that happens to them turning black in their chest as though assembled to combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurs in their finger spreading throughout the chest.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person starts preparing for self-medication with pus that the healing goes to the member as strong as it causes pain and intensifies their condition, and they cut into that chest at the junction, and he heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, this corruption incident occurs in the hand's finger region.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it reaches me, and so I must carefully consider the repercussions of this excess on those who are subjected to these medicines, affecting the body's transformation; and the excess does not recur but begins to spread into another finger starting where it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he urges me to cut into his hand, but I do not want to do that fearing the repercussions of this excess, rather than fear the cutting of his hand which is about to die, for the virtue of the patient was in dying.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he became angry with me, he returned to his land and informed me that the person cut his entire hand and healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not told this story for any other reason than to provide assistance about this disease of the patient, and its meaning which must be understood and according to which it has been done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the cure of sinus issues and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is extended causing collection of pus, then it bursts and perforates, and pus escapes from there, leaving the site empty as if it were a vessel, and the membrane that was covering it also like fine cloth, and does not reach deeper corruption, nor seeps into the bone or nerves or tissues, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is extended to the point where corruption begins in any member, then it is called a fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to cut out that membrane completely as if it has been turned inside out, and especially when it is delicate like fine cloth, and you arrange so that it does not stick to the site due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	And if you expect that the membrane will stick and that corruption has not reached deeper consequences, and if pus has escaped from the membrane, then you treat it with enemas.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider it as a sinus, then if it's large, the smell that emanates from your arm is Egyptian medicine made of oil and vinegar and ginger with equal parts each, which are placed in a container, and are heated on fire until the medicine boils and spreads like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you take what is necessary from him, dissolve it in water and honey; and suppurate with that on his stomach, strengthen his opening, and leave the medicine in him for the amount of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that from its place; and do this for several days until the stomach is cleansed and the odor has subsided.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some washes are made with ash water, when this medicine is not available to you; and you take the ashes of birch, put them in water; then boil that and suppurate with it until you find that your stomach has been cleansed, at which point there will be no odor.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient doesn't tolerate this Egyptian medicine or ash water, then suppurate with water and honey, mixed with finely ground clay. Suppurate also with a mixture of wine and honey; it's the property of honey that cleanses and washes, and wine makes the stomach adhere, especially when there is excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do these washes and find that your stomach has cleared up, then suppurate with what makes the flesh give birth in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take rhubarb unguent, dissolve that with roasted oil and astringent wine; or suppurate with some medicines and other ointments which have their properties written in the treatise of unguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the stomach is narrow so that the catheter cannot be inserted for suppurating, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron rod, and rest your hand covered in Egyptian unguent or basilisk unguent until it's expanded.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you stitch up the lips of the patient and let in an amount for which an additional catheter can be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening in the body from which the arm flows is raised above the parts above, then dry that at the lowest point of the pus where it's located so that the arm can flow into you, when the arm is constricted in the depth of the stomach, the flesh will be generated in you.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it's not possible to dry the stomach inside at the location of the lowest pus as you want, then pierce that and prepare the member for what allows it to flow from you just slightly according to your capacity and so that no cause of the arm is kept back.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed on your stomach at a location where you want to extend those above the bandage fabric.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the bandage should be of such size that it allows communication with all parts of your stomach; then insert the knives at the right angle of the opening in your stomach, making an ample and narrow cut so that the opening in your stomach can be made wide. Then extend over another piece of this bandage with lion ointments according to the amount of the cut, place it on that for a position far from the opening of your stomach, so that the flow of your arm is facilitated and doesn't distort the large bandage; instead replace it every few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Let that which is over the opening of your stomach be adjusted at all times so that it doesn't allow anything to escape from your arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And in order to know whether what flows from you through your arm is much or little, whether it's digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And in this regard, you should consider the place of that stomach, if the patient feels pain or not, and whether it's in the abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is extended in this manner and you see the substance that's discharged over the opening of your stomach adheres, or gains adherence, then leave it to dry or let it heal naturally. When the wound heals, change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Let it be known that if there's a large space near the stomach that allows for subtle viruses to spread, don't despair of the healing process in your body; sometimes this depends on individual factors such as how long flesh takes to regenerate in their wounds, and these are among those who experience the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if your arm is indigest for several days near the stomach, then you know that the stomach does not adhere. And if the adherence of the stomach takes longer and causes a prolonged issue, then adjust it in drying off of medicines; and if the medicines are wet in their substance and lose their effectiveness, they should be dried like rhubarb ointment, when there is excess addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the main thing that follows is that you take rhubarb ointment and dissolve it in roasted oil, and have it travel back and forth through your veins like its original substance, then apply it to you, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it behaves similarly in that action, when there is no arm, rhubarb ointment and honey when applied within it becomes thickened, use it; or take myrrh and aloes and mix them together, then heat the mixture with honey until thick, spread this on a bandage and strengthen it over your stomach; then spread that with thickened honey and heat it again, spread it on a bandage.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some washes are given to you using the long traditional aristocratic knowledge and research of celestial lilies (which are indeed celestial lilies), flour from beeswax, and centauria. Use those simple remedies or adjust them, grind those into a powder and mix it with the honey I recommended; then use them.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the lung is elongated and cannot be healed by this treatment, then you must know that corruption has affected him, and it already reaches into the bones or into other hard parts of his body or joints; in that case, treat it with a tubercular cure, as explained above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	In the treatment of ingrowing toenails and clipped nails, including the addition of cutting into the finger and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Ingrowing toenail is an abscess which causes the nail to push against the tip of the finger or toe, and strongly pushes other nails into the digits. If it's prolonged and its treatment becomes expensive, or if it discharges pus from an abscess, or gets corrupted, then you put your arm in that the corrosion eats through the nail bed, and forcefully corrupts all of that area, and forces the corruption up to the bone where it smells bad, and makes the tip of that side cut off, and its color becomes black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that like what we've said in the division and if your treatment doesn't show results, then it's clear that you should cut off all excess matter that has accumulated under the nail and proceed to cauterize the wound there. A hot iron is helpful in this process.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May it be if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the extensions of the nail have already penetrated the tissues inwardly, starting to pierce and guide that area, then you should know how to pause at the subtle point by the angle of the nail where you are piercing the flesh, pushing that inwards and cutting into that flesh with ease, placing your hand on it as the remaining flesh of the medicated corrosive substances burn inwardly until everything is thoroughly cooked; and then treat that with ointment once it's healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May it be if corruption has already infiltrated the bone, then you should know that you must cut into the bone at that point and remove it, because nothing heals when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice the corrosion and corruption spreading in that finger, then you should cut into it at one of its nodes according to how much is recalled by its memory, and treat that area once it's healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	And if there's hammering or scraping under the nail, and if there is severe pain in that area, then you should know that at the beginning of surgery on the patient, you must cut off the affected leg, and proceed to remove the nail with a sharp knife transversely above it, making sure not to let the cut reach the flesh beneath where the nail was left, which will cause the patient severe pain, and leads to the production of unnecessary tissue in that area; and then treat that area with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And this is called 'adjustment', which naturally occurs in the bones of many people. It strongly affects flesh all over, or it weakens bones, or it affects the nail itself.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are natural in the base of the joint, or they occur naturally in certain nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And it is not bad when something natural occurs in some nodes of the finger, whereas that which naturally occurs at joints often causes harm.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are naturally fleshy, the cut is light, and you should cut into them by going across their base with a sharp knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And of those that are naturally located at the base of joints, treatment is difficult; therefore, be careful with their removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And in that which is naturally located at the joints, you should know that when you start to cut into the flesh by making a round incision inside the bone, proceed to use one of those suitable saws for this task, and then treat that area once it's healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	And this is consolidation which happens among joints due to their natural connections or from the body's condition of health, or from illness effects or fire burn injuries, or from scars. You should know that when you remove that consolidation, allowing the fingers to return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And between their finger joints, place layers of lint in oil that has been rubbed to prevent them from lightly consolidating, or separate each layer by placing a thin sheet of lead between them as needed for consolidation.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation happens in some fingers of the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it has been prepared and conforms to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	In terms of incisions, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are involved; they contain large, full vessels filled with melancholic excesses which appear in the limbs of the body, and their main manifestation is seen on the legs, especially for those who travel, work, or carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	And you should know that when administering the treatment of black cholera's purgative for the heart, you may perform several strong expulsions, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of varicose veins can be carried out in two ways: one is to cut them and remove that black mass, and the other method is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision proceeds in this way: start by opening the leg with hot water inside until the large mass has dissolved, which is fluidified within the leg, then strengthen the calf of the leg to the upper part of the thigh into a part below it on one bend, and proceed to drain the vein at one place or two or three with wide incisions, and then elevate the black blood with your right hand from the part opposite the leg inside and above, until you have extracted the quantity that you want and is sufficient, which will draw out the virtue of the leg.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply that, and command the patient to abstain from eating the food causing black fever.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full and we notice improvement in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of their health proceeds according to this manner: you who raise the patient's chest, if there are boils on their back, then dip it in hot water and immerse the back area with hot water until it reddens and the veins become swollen; or if hot water is not available, let the member be cut, so that the body part becomes heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the cut near the vein by section in the long or back direction, or at the bottom of the patient from where you should descend, or at the lowest part of the wound you should ascend.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the wound with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel pain, and you should observe the condition of the patient that responds to that treatment declining towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you have evacuated and from the wound you perform that white method where it becomes a thread.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place this string inside until it is elevated and passes through the wound, and suspend this from an oak branch or a lion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three days, and scrape the wound from the part above the vein until you see it.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that and cut the last section near the bottom, and then extract that and lift it until it passes through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the section that is further below or a pus spot of all sections, until everything is extracted; and then cut that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and lift, then insert a strong double thick needle and move that, or insert your thread and turn your hand in all directions until it is immersed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And remember not to cut too deeply; if it breaks, you'll find it hard to lift that part and the harm will spread over the patient because of that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have completely immersed it in water and oil and undressed oil, place over the affected area wool that's soaked in water and oil, both dressed and not dressed, and treat it until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the blood vessel is tight and has twists that are enveloped around its branches, not as we said it should be straight, then cut open over that at every part of the twists in it, and at the places of wrapping around them, and then suspend that with scissors until you lift all of it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And remember you should take care of your section, not to cut the vein and do not torment that area, as it will be difficult for you to lift that; exercise caution in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision when the blood vessel is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of an oak branch:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as hot and sharp as other blades, nor does it have a pointed tip so as not to irritate the vein; it has a lion's thickness with flexibility, if it were too thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness. Having said that, it should be at an adequate thickness as we have mentioned.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Concerning the extraction of the saphenous vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is formed in the thighs in southern lands as in Al-Ategi in the Arabian lands and in the southern desert regions of India where there are very few plants, and in which neither grass nor herbs grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And this vein is formed in other parts of the body except for these areas of the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its formation is from putrefaction that affects the wound as if there are poisons within the body like snakes, worms and insects causing decay between the wound and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the impending arrival of this is when this vein suddenly flares up in the thigh. Then, that place becomes inflamed; and then it begins to give rise from the site of that inflammation as if it's coming out of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see it at the extremity, then guide that you place upon it a weight of lead whose weight is equal to that of one drachm. Inside two drachms, and lay that down and hang the lead suspended from the bandage.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as it recurs because of some cause outside its branches, wrap this in lead and place that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain is prolonged, then you should cut a part of it and envelop what remains; and do not cut that where it's straight until it is completely extracted, for if you cut that it will be tight and enters into the flesh causing pus to occur at the site and an ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And do so gently so that it is extracted gradually, until it is removed from the rear end of it and does not recur due to any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein extends in some people up to the length of their palm bones and beyond, I myself have seen one that reached twice its length.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the thread in its root and perforate that along the long spine throughout the body, until all is evacuated from the matter, and administer putrefaction to the area with some days of medicines; and then treat that through the cure of pus.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes causes redness, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and flows into its openings, and it comes out from any opening branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so cure that in this way as we have said in the division and what was mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section about worms generated under the skin, it is called the bovine discomfort.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some territories as the bovine discomfort because it often appears in bulls and has a worm inside that's born between the intestines and flesh, going up and down throughout the body, being shown by the sensation of its movement from member to member interrupting the intestines and coming out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of this is due to the putrefaction of certain fluids, thus like it happens with worms, snakes, earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it's found by the mischief of this, when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the nose, then it becomes inflamed in him and enters inside, destroying the nose, thus causing red spots.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure that and remove it, then do not do so unless you observe its movement and appearance according to your feeling, and then understand what is above it and what is below it with strength and constriction, and then dry it up around it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it's found in the flesh and you don't feel it, then place a searing point on fire at the spot where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of this which corrupts the spot as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if this thing penetrates to the head close to the nose, then press on the eyebrow with strong constriction, and then dry it up around it, and extract that; know that a patient should use alteration of their body through medicines eliminating bad putrid fluids, and guard against foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the section about discomfort caused by nafir (possibly related to bile or some form of internal disturbance).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it's discomfort which appears in some body parts, then spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I already showed you the second one that I will describe.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to help a female patient in a village, and I found her arm swollen slightly along the funis vein. After an hour of it being like that, I saw that the swelling moved as if a worm were climbing towards this area, but less intensely than when pressed, as if it were living silver running from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then one feels the pain in that area and stays focused on the muscle, then here stops for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then proceeds throughout the other body into which it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then he told me that it moved around his entire body according to what I saw; I was too amazed by the transformation and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my own nose according to that manner, however, I have seen things causing pain to be transformed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I didn't see it like this in the nose as in the female case.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I don't think it is merely this because the female was young, with thin body and visible veins, and in this case appears that transformed windiness is felt.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it's necessary that it doesn't appear according to this backward flow in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with swollen veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure for this, and the patient feels that pain, then it's not as obvious at the nose like we said, instead press on that place lightly and dry it up around that spot where the discomfort is constricted, and sear the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you don't find it in your own nose, then you cure that by releasing the body and by what expels wind, and make those pills with stinking herbs and those of serapis and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Regarding the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species and the locations within the body where they penetrate, due to their variety including those that have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones, which are solid. There are also arrows that have three angles, as well as arrows that have tongues, and those that are spines.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the ones that are according to the limbs and their sections within which I hunt them can be done in two ways: when they affect or affect their main limbs like the head, heart, stomach, lungs, intestines, kidneys, bladder, and similar; thus when you find signs of death among these limbs and they manifest as death symptoms, then you should know that for those who die because of it, within the most critical conditions, you should avoid extracting that arrow in such cases. And when you do not observe those ill symptoms, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb; then you extract that one and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the symptoms for the head, when you find it in the arrow and it passes through the bone, it causes disorientation due to its position on the brain, which occurs from severe dehydration, blindness, dizziness, nausea, tongue swelling and pain, abdominal cramps, confusion, vomiting, and in the patient's appearance there is a sign of dampness like dust, resembling thirstiness of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if these signs appear to you, then refrain from the treatment and the extraction of the needle, if it is not out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the signs of the needle are in the chest, it means that she is close to the left nipple, and feels at this place when there's a hard cause, and not a visible one; and if you feel the movement of the needle as if it were the pulse beat, and the course of the infected area becomes black, and causes that cold sensation in the extremities, sweat starts, and fainting occurs; then know that death descends through her whole body.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The signs when the needle has reached the lung are a frothy blood flow from the wound, and the vessels near the throat become distended. The color of the face changes, one starts to expire large amounts of breath, and demands for air to be breathed in quickly.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the needle is in the membrane which is in the legs, and the pain occurs close to the small ribs, and there is a huge intense pain and sighing, and it doesn't affect all the muscles of the body.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the needle is in the stomach, then there is often a passage of pain accompanied by indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the needle is in the belly and stuck to it, there might be an opening of a wound or the tissue, or the hernia which gets burst, and there's no hope for the patient's treatment by removing the needle.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the needle is found in the bladder and urine starts to leak out, causing some process outside of it due to certain causes, then if there's pain on the back from this, know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Consider the other body parts as well such as the face, throat, belly button, shoulders and auxiliary areas, and the backbones of both sides, the breastbone, the hips, and their corresponding regions on each body part. They should be treated according to the main procedures when the needle does not encounter a vein or an artery and it is not a poisonous needle.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I advise you to understand these things that I have observed about this needle business, so that you may know how to treat it.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is why: if someone gets a needle in the eye socket of their upper eyelid and I remove it from the other side, leaving the ear's wax on them, they get better and don't suffer harm to their nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And remove another needle from a Jew which gets stuck in them under the ear's wax. Let the eyelid stay intact and do not get rid of it, the needle was already hidden and could not be reached by that method. It was a big needle among the sharp needles of the Turks, made of iron without any ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it's a Jew, there shouldn't be any damage to their nose in an unfortunate incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And remove another needle from a Christian which was stuck in the belly button, it was an Arab needle, and that's the one with ears. And then I cut through this between two guides, it was already submerged in their belly button; and then I sharpened this, drew out that needle, and the Christian got better.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And remove another needle from a man which was stuck in his belly; I feared he would die by this. And then, considering that it had passed 30 days and there was no change to any of his condition, I cut through the needle and made an incision over it, and he got better, and did not suffer harm by this accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I see another man in whom a needle gets stuck in his back, the wound is consolidated over him, and since it has been around for about seven years, it was removed from the surface of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I see a woman in whom a needle gets stuck in her belly, the wound is consolidated inside her, and there has been no change to her condition in relation to it, and the woman does not suffer harm during any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I see another man to whom a needle gets stuck in his face, the wound is consolidated and the needle has been removed, not causing any pain or similar symptoms here.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And remove the needle from the king's prince's nose where it was stuck in the middle and already declined to the right side, the whole needle was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment around three days after it got stuck with the needle insertion.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I stretched the wound from the needle spot; and then I tried to prick that with a delicate tool but didn't feel it. However, he felt this poke on the right earlobe, and so I suspected that this poke was at the end of the needle.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied plaster to the area where there is an attractive and digestive force, believing that this place needs treatment as it's where I can perceive the needle's location, so I proceed with treating that spot.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no harm occurred at the significant location where you've found that spot; I continued applying plaster on him for several days without any incident; while consolidating this wound, the ear returned from the removal process after about several days. During that period, I felt the needle inside his nose and informed you of this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied a quick-acting corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened up. Then with my tool, I tried to soften that spot and stretched out the delicate end of the needle which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And I adjust in the opening of the wound by that acute medicine through which visibly appears the tip of the needle, and pass this with me for the spaces of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And I aim to expand the wound until it's big enough for me to insert the knives into you, and refine that area, without allowing any inflammation. So I don't cease to think and invent with my hands in ways of technique, starting from the next day using forceps to gently remove what was extracted; then I restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage is not restored, but I have restored that and the wound has been consolidated. The patient recovers fully through health and does not suffer any harm.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you on the quality of extraction for some needles in order to consider this rule and meaning concerning what I haven't told, where the divisions of this art and the definitions of that one are not understood from this narrative nor do they understand them freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen should compare on little about movement; and on what is present compared to what is absent; and find new operation and new tool you need for the descent of the causes of foreign arts when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that needles are not found outside the members where they are placed but according to two ways: or by penetration into the location in which they enter; or opposite the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that one that is placed by the location gives entry, or the needle proceeds in a meaty place, it is thrown and placed outside.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not heed the feeling of your body when it's being treated, then wait a few days until the meat around it settles down and the penetration and its departure are relieved.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is placed in bones and you do not heed your body's feeling, then let that rest for a few days and return to this with penetration and movement every day, and already it will be outside.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not heed your body for such days, then wait to puncture in the circuit of the needle throughout the bone with fine travel until the location is enlarged by the needle, and then extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the needle is placed in the bones of the head and has progressed through one of the areas of the brain, showing symptoms similar to those I've mentioned in the body, then refrain from removing the needle and let it stay until its state becomes normal for such days; because if the needle reaches the eye socket, then death will not prolong with you.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the needle is placed only within the bone of the body and does not pass into the eye socket, and the patient remains in the body for such days, and no cause of those accidents befalls him, then you think about removing the needle and about its removal.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is moved and you do not heed its removal, then you manage travels in the circuit of the needle as we have recommended, and then take care of the location until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the needle is already hidden in the body's location, and it is hidden from your feelings, then you inquire about that through tests, and if you feel that, then pull that with such movements which are suitable for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the thread, and here there are no bones, nerves or veins, then work on the wound until it's enlarged and making extraction of the needle is possible.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it's located in the hollows of gold where it's placed from all parts to all your techniques; and think about this, if you can't release the meat in the breakage of these hollows and within their twist where you should consider.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you manage the removal of the needle in any place where it is, then you use twisting with forceps from all parts so that this obeys; and refine to extreme refinement so that the needle does not break and that it is done in a way that makes your removal difficult and this extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot handle this at your time, then let it rest for several days until the parts that are in its circuit settle down, and then return to this which becomes easier later.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it causes you difficulty in blood flow, then administer what we've said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your skill of starting veins or nerves, or chords, and manage techniques in all possible ways for the removal of the needle; and do this with ease, calmness, speed, and strength as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And when you make the needle bend according to its own figure that which you must place the insertion of the needle in him, so that the body is better.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible for you, then manage what is possible with these figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And if these needles are placed opposite the other side, or already proceed through some part to those from outside, or make the end of the needle bend due to feeling of the part above the final destination and sometimes it's prominent; then you handle that; and choose this section according to how many forceps can take it in quantity; then pull that, because it is done gently by touch.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is trapped in the throat, then you twist the tongue according to opposition until the needle enters the throat, expand and amplify this movement, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, let that stay for a few days, and then continue to move that inward until it burns.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the needle's point is inside that, then you push that towards him/her.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the needle's point is broken and you want to administer an impulse, then you insert into that. If it is deaf, strike the inner side with your hand until between his/her body and the back of the needle, then push that towards him/her.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the needle is concave, then you push that strongly into it, where the needle gets relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the needle is exposed, then you hollow out all the flesh in which there is the vein, if it is within your ability to do so, and then heal that according to what suits.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the needle is in the feet, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it's close to what you touch, then touch that on your fingertip, and if within your ability, press on that. Then press on that, avoid touching a vein or nerve, extract that, and afterwards take care of the wound where it is necessary, and heal that until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of the forceps on which arrows are placed:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let their ends be like the tip of a syringe which are made like pliers when they grasp onto the arrow, such that they don't let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those special modifications of them, there are large spots, few in number and somewhat uneven, according to the quantity of size of the arrow and its slightness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction thereof.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the concave pusher from this curved end as if it were a syringe point such that it relieves the internal structure of the arrow within him/her, and impulse of this deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of the pusher on the deaf end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	As if it were a needle, such that it relieves his/her internal organs in the concave arrow and is pushed towards that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Regarding bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for bloodletting which usually require bloodletting are .xxx, which are in the head .xvi., these are two pulsatile veins which are close to the temples, they're called auricular; these are two herbs that are in both of the temples visible; and these are two veins that are in two lacrimal areas under each nostril and are called aspiant; and there is a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and this one is located at the end of the nose; and these are two jugular veins which are at the neck; and these are two veins that are above the lips; and these are two veins that are below the lips; and - these are the veins called algalic ones; and these are two veins that run down the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are bloodletted in the arms are .v.; And of those veins that are bloodletted in the chest are .v.; which is one cephalic vein and is associated with the wild heart; and the people call it "the head vein", and deafly, and this is a somewhat uneven vein, made up from a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic; and they name that vein by the people as "the vein of all the body", and basilica vein which is placed above the domestic heart is called "shimmering", and the common folk call it "the belly vein"; and the arm veins, and are placed above the collarbone, and this is the one in which bloodletting occurs, and it's the one that appears on the chest for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and this is the vein that is between the so-called auricular and small pus, and they're present in its two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the chest and ribcage are three veins; one of those is that which runs down the curve of the wild heart's base; and the second is sophena, its place being below the rib of the domestic heart; and sciatic vein, its place is above the rib of the wild heart; and in the ribcage there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youth of the veins that are close to the temples is for the removal of ancient and migratory, and bleeding and ulcers in the head from old times.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of pulling those is according to what I recommend you: it should be that the head is shaved and the head of the patient in the occipital area against both veins with good friction; strengthen the patient's neck with a bend where two appear, close to the temples on both sides of the head; pull this towards your right side, and if you feel the pulse of those at your right side, there is trouble.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Approach you take the cutting lance, and that is the one that is incident, approach you insert this below the vein in the neck between where bloodletting leads to the throat.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And approach you raise your hand towards the vein and neck upwards to the parts above, and cut into the vein at the incident point of entry.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be about two inches or a little more than that; and bleed out as much blood as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with powders and let that remain until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already in the introduction of this book, we have discussed those treatments and their use of cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Two of the two veins and arteries, which are the young blood's companions in Templar youth, are migraines that are bad and recurrent, and frequent conjunctivitis, and various acute flow diseases that afflict humans.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of removing these is as I recommend you: strengthen the patient's neck and insert a stick so that both veins appear in their feeling, clearly by manifestation, and show your pulse at where your instruction says; then try it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the rod over the vein below the part above your instruction, and introduce the bloodletting tool diagonally there, and raise the vein in its place; and cut that like you did with the other veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then relax the constriction of the patient's thigh, place your instruction over the vein for an hour, and also place it over that point with powders and strengthen that above against the strong constriction, and let that remain until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already we have recalled them and their introduction, as well as the procedure, in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the youth of bloodletting for the vein on the forehead is akin to the bloodletting for the occipital artery in old facial ailments, migraines, swelling, and infected ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bloodletting for him is as I recommend you: namely, that the patient strengthens his neck with a stick so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called 'fossoria', which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the tip of the fossoria over that vein and press it on him from above or with another reason in his way, and let the blood flow according to the amount you want; then relax the puncture on the thigh and let that remain until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes openings are made in bloodletting later, but one must not make the bloodletting at the tip of the acute condition like others, before it is on the side tip, and perform that bloodletting across according to the transverse way, where the bone is close and weakly it would break through him if it was thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Two of the veins that are in two eyes due to infection by tears and swelling in the eyes, as well as facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of bloodletting is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a stick and then perform bloodletting there, and you stand on top of their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting is performed longitudinally in a few places with small bloodlettings, where there is no flesh. And if the needle for bloodletting is thin and weak, its end will break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as it is necessary for you, place on that point and strengthen those for one night, and relax those afterwards.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The bloodletting of the vein in the nose is suitable for acute fever and strong heat, as well as facial diseases and migraines that occur on the face, especially if they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bloodletting for him is that the patient should strengthen his neck and place your left hand on his nose, then take the thin needle long and put it in the middle location of the nose according to straightness, where the vein does not appear here, and where the blood starts to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Make sure to finish your hand with the bloodletting tool gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then relax that for one night, as it is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Two of the symptoms that indicate bloodletting are constriction of the guides and the beginning of leprosy, as well as bad skin diseases, itching, and corrosive ulcers like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting for those is that the patient should strengthen each one in their neck with a stick; and place the craftsmen on the head, and have the patient lie on one elbow.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform bloodletting along the length with an ample needle gradually; and then draw out blood according to season or quantity, or according to what you need as much as you want; and then pretend it is another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then relax the stick and strengthen both veins with a middle constriction so that the patient is not burned, let it remain until morning when the disease has been healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Two of the symptoms indicating bloodletting for veins in algeritis include small spots and pus-filled lesions on the mouth, corruption of gum tissues, bad ulcers, and cracks; as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and along the body's circulation.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting for those is to have you cut in front of you with the scalpel, strengthen the neck of the patient with a stick and then rotate his lips checking for two veins; one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each is through the blueness of both, and it's more so when there are thin black veins in their circulation; then you cut each at an oblique incision point.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubts and do not know which of those is the case, then you should perform an incision on the most severe of those, and also if there's obvious pus present.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make as if to touch the two veins that are in the cheeks above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	You should often cut towards the incision of the two veins that are in the cheek when you do this.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	You are to cut the two veins that are in your cheek when you're young, close to the femoral vein at the location where they exist on the thigh, in front of the neck, at the base of the tonsil, and other mouths.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of performing this venipuncture is to follow your chest in front of the solar plexus and elevate the tongue from them, then observe your tongue, considering one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and each color's hue becomes black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And puncture each one of them; and remember not to end your hand in the venipuncture of these ones, as they are arteries that you leave behind.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are venipunctured in your armpit are in those where pain is customary in all men, and the venipuncture of them is performed according to two ways: they place it on the mirtilat or olive vein with subtlety declining; or cut on the venipuncture knife, and call this one anesthesiology, and this is how it is done:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this anesthesia is that you agree to section and those have special sides and subtleties according to the width of the veins and according to the narrowing of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of venipuncture mirtili:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Shape of venipuncture mirtili:
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is how the olive venipuncture works:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this olive-like venipuncture has lesser breadth and more delicate extremity; it is for the venipuncture of smaller veins that contain subtle granular fat.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Performing the juvenile procedure of the venipuncture from the basilic vein which is one of three veins: you extract the fat from the neck, shoulder area and stomach, as well as from all parts of your body.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And the one performing venipuncture should be cautious when doing this; if their finger is over the artery while they perform it, and if they make a mistake in puncturing the venipuncture point, they will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so ensure that they do not accidentally use an agonizing method before using anesthesia.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by a clear manifestation, then you must leave it and switch to another, or search for any nearby branches; or perform venipuncture at the end of the arm where this is obvious; and cut that with anesthesia in the same manner as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want the venipuncture of your metatarsus, then go before the constriction of your arm where you recognize the area of your pulse, and press down on it with your thumb; and bend your arm slightly while cutting in a concave section using anesthesia as we have said. Remember to apply pressure for some space around the artery location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press with your strength at the area where you've pressed down with your thumb, then in that location there is an inflation, which is the inflation of the artery; thus avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the venipuncture as with an infant's urine, then you know it is from artery blood; thus stop your hand there for a long time and hold that area; and if the blood stops flowing out, where it has been reduced, then strengthen your arm and let that part alone.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the belly of the child, as well as any excess fear towards it and do not disturb that for a few days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood does not stop, and you need to administer medicine for this; then you will cut into the artery if it shows up to you; where its extremity is contracted, and the blood stops flowing out. Or you might take a longer time with fists, do this, take one method, strengthen this on that location of vein against the muscle descent between the other day's dust particles.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood stops flowing out, then it's good; and if not, then heal that with the medicine of which was mentioned before in relation to the recollection of places where dust particles cause bleeding.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of blood flow from it is difficult in certain locations due to the small size of the wound and the flexibility of your arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The venipuncture of the dark vein is juvenile as you extract the fat from the upper part of the head and at the lower part of the body; because it is made up of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And guide the bloodletter towards that which is excessive fear in the bloodletting of the patient, where this one is a nerve; and when you adjust in the puncture of the bloodletting and find the nerves, it will cause him to be dazed, making his recovery difficult, and makes him not fully recover. And this nerve produces feelings that are felt; if it's hidden among some men and is subtle and isn't shown, then when you place the bloodletting tool on the section where you bleed from the elbow, avoid touching the nerves with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The youth of the bloodletting procedure for the cephalic vein is that you draw blood from the head and bring it to alleviate the suffering in the patient's legs.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And do this precisely, if you want the bloodletting needles to puncture at an olive bloodletting or a mirt bloodletting; which is the saved pus from all veins, and it does not harm your artery or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, when you perform bloodletting, remember that with the bloodletting needle, do not puncture right at the tip of the wound only, but seek out the smallest pus area and don't let him know about it, unless it's found by pressing down for the first time that is located on that point in the bloodletting tool.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it's allowed for some patients to have a reaction when bloodletting is not done in the first press, rather than noticing any lump afterwards.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	That is, when assessing the quality of bloodletting from that patient and their accidents, you should consider how to correct them, as it involves taking into account these matters.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing about this is knowing that bloodletting should only be administered for the maintenance of health and with hope for the patient's recovery, as well as caution against potential leg problems; it involves performing bloodletting on one of the veins in the arm: cephalic, dark, and basilic. Bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and during winter near mealtime, when signs of overfullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And bloodletting should be performed when it's at least three hours after the morning meal or at the start of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Bloodletting should be administered when it provides convenience and necessity to the patient or at night or during the day, in any hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And remember that an infant should not undergo bloodletting until they are fourteen years old, a pregnant woman should only be bled starting from the fourth month of pregnancy until about seven months, and elderly persons over sixty years of age should not be subjected to bloodletting.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wants to undergo bloodletting for any reason, be sure to change their intestines before the bloodletting with a lion's dung enema. If they have a hidden soreness in those areas, so that the veins do not pull the excess out during bloodletting of the intestines, which are cleansed, and do not reach the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not bleed patients with serious disease or malnutrition, nor before any illness or drunkenness, nor in cases of leg problems due to water retention, nor due to the loss of virtue, whether it's physical or bodily. And bloodletting should be feared when there is pain, when vomiting occurs, and when there's discomfort from the stomach, as well as after sexual intercourse and labor and any cause that dissolves the essence, either physically or in terms of health.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And when it comes to purging of the body before that, if the pain is strong with food and drinks, then consider it as well. And if medicine is possible for him, use medicines.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And consider engaging in bathing should any cause prevent it, or through some exercise that might help to alleviate the pain.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop bloodletting at night, around three o'clock in the morning, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And ensure that the night of this day be watched in relation to all animal accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as work, unnecessary guilt, sex, and things like them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And according to his preference, have the reasons for using those that are common among men regarding aromatics and scent, as well as medicines and such according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And guide the bloodletting instrument on a cushion that is as good, if not better than, the cushion of the one who should be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And adjust his arm, and press that on his hand with the bloodletting tool two or three times; and strengthen his muscle with the cord and encircle him in two places.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And for the appropriate compression, when the restriction is not equal, or the restriction is due to excess, then prohibit blood flow from the pain; or if it's due to calming down, then prohibit the spread of the pain throughout.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And for the proper compression, when it comes to the one who should be bled, press his hands simultaneously in between them while the veins are swollen and felt by sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And for the bloodletting tool, smear its needle with a little ancient olive oil; and then place your right hand's final position over that vein, determining where the bloodletting will occur, so that the vein swells a little, and you pause at this point in the pressing. The vein should be felt as if it's being pulled away by a cord - which means it's full of wind. And when you place the bloodletting tool on that spot, it contracts the bloodletting tool, revealing the bloodletting process; and the bloodletting tool does not pierce the vein, but if it does, then that area is stretched out.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, because of this it is understood that the bloodletter must be careful and diligent in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then move the bloodletting tool; but if the vein has been punctured in one place, that's fine; and otherwise, you must try again at another location for just a little more, or apply pressure with your hand where it is not swollen, if the area is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is swollen or the patient gets worse, then you leave it for one day or two days, and do not apply pressure, because a hot cauterization would bring out pus, nor enter with water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And again perform bloodletting if the patient is still unwell.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and there's subtle bleeding underneath, and you're afraid that it won't bleed enough of what you want, then again perform bloodletting in that area according to rectitude and adjustment on the wound, and make sure your hand isn't too close to the location before pus appears. When the pus appears in men who have been cut many times, you should do less cutting for each wound.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if you've already seen that it has pus, then don't apply to him, there is no excuse for your action; pause on that part of the incision in some place of the oil hole, which consoles the body with the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it's better in this location than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer oil incision in all bloodletting when you drain the veins, there is the prohibition of blood from the body, and perform this tyroiac ointment and salve whenever it's paused on that spot, where the blood becomes diluted and mixes when it's thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of bloodletting is produced a large pus, which thick incisions occur, especially when someone hasn't been bled only that one time or on their leg, and otherwise you clean, then pause over the area with wet sponge infused in water, one that's scraped, and apply pressure for an hour, where it will dissolve.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And consider that you should do this near the seat of blood from that vein in coordination with him or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains any darkness or greenness in the area for some days, don't notice this; and if you want, place on that substance of aloes and dissolved myrra, or a substance of mint juice or calamus or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And thick incisions occur with pus and swellings, you must perform bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And pause your hand on that, and if later you feel softness, then maintain your pressure over that. Then that prominence is bad and harmful; and thereafter, be sure to place on that substance of what we've said, because forcefully it will flow from the blood vessel.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to that area where the inflammation is concentrated, so that the wound heals, and then care for that as part of whatever other treatment brings you relief.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And consider to extract from the blood of every man according to the amount of their virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the blood is black, then you let it bleed within that it becomes red. Similarly, if you see thick, you let it bleed within that it becomes diluted. And similarly, if it's sharp, within that you stop the sharpness of it.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And consider for that which is full and strong and has the need of blood extraction in one place, the bloodletting should be extended to the vein and the bloodletting tool should be deep.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for that which is pale, do the opposite of that, and consider to extract it in many incisions, and that the cut should be deep.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in bloodletting from a vein is to make it cross-sectional, not puncturing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of bloodletting saves from the flow of blood and from the interruption of nerves, and is highly praiseworthy and very safe for bloodletting according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in which, if you are accustomed to experience fainting attacks, then consider treating that before bloodletting with a little of a poultice in wine made from milk thistle or simple water mixed with vinegar; and extract the blood from the wound in three incisions or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it has been mixed with complexity, then before bloodletting take an infusion in the essargap of myrrh or in flavored honey in essence such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and others like that, or in a flavored and aromatic syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs, you must perform bloodletting, and it is the cause of his excess of moving blood, then consider to take drinking water from meat and flavored syrup with a subtle odor; and use aromatization in some way, and limit his food there.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we've mentioned in the division for treatment of fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if someone wants to expel their arm and dissolve their blood again in the second time, consider that for those with blood evacuation, and his virtue is cold, that it should expel the blood gradually, according to the quantity of his virtue on consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if someone wants to expel their arm and get rid of their blood again in the second time, and their body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When someone wants to direct the blood flow of their body against its natural direction, it happens that this event occurs on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When the body has moved blood that is already weak and sharpens it causing fever, it happens that this event occurs on one occasion and a large amount of blood is discharged, which amplifies the feeling until it causes syncope. For this reason, you should keep all conditions for phlebotomy; and when your hand rests on the pulse of the patient, you will control their blood flow so they do not die due to syncope instead. This often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and careless.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to straighten the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, as soon as you close the opening of the vein and it becomes difficult to release the blood, you press under that area with forcefulness and slightly bend it back, this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the layoff in place for a second time during bloodletting; or let it stay at this point until the bleeding from bloodletting has coagulated in the opening of the vein; or press with that of ammoniacal plaster, or of chalky substance, and apply a light compression under which the blood is expelled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein has been punctured, then lay off that one and do not touch it until the abscess is quiescent.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood again, and it's not an excuse, then prick that area or on another limb at another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the tendon of the arm" is bloodletting in place of the gallbladder or basilic vein, when they are not tied up or hidden, which is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of bloodletting for a patient is that the sick person immerses their hand in cold water while it becomes reddened easily and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And tighten over that area with a gentle ligature; and perform bloodletting on the transverse line, not laterally or longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make sure the feeling is wide and your bloodletting on that about the joint of the hand is little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the blood flow is prohibited, then you dip your hand in cold water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Understand that if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from dipping your hand in cold water, and similarly, you hold back the flow of blood in cold water during winter times.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the bloodletting through this vein is safer than through all others, for you do not have any pulsating vein or nerve left on it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the bloodletting of the thumb artery is beneficial for the diseases of the arm.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of bloodletting for this is that you strengthen your hand with a ligature or with your own hand, because you have it laid out in cold water, while the vein swells and is demonstrated by shaking; then perform bloodletting on this transversely; and if you insert into all veins, you should not do so recklessly.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember that you don't finish your hand during bloodletting, because on you it's the nerves of the fingers bare of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And tighten your hand in cold water and let the blood flow through it; if you don't tighten this part in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, which is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when extracting blood according to the amount of need, then you pause over the vein oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated gradually; similarly ensure that you do this in all ramified veins.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Understand that the youth of bloodletting for this in your left hand is beneficial for diseases of the elbow.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do something similar with bloodletting of this as you did with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the cephalic vein in bloodletting is for diseases that are found on your body's sides, just as with mother diseases, and retention of menses, and diseases related to veins, as well as diseases of cheeks and old sores, and they resemble other diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of bloodletting for this is that the patient immerses their hand in cold water and performs friction there until veins appear; lie over the joint of the arm with a bandage; and for the place where the apparent vein lies, you should apply it at that spot, and from that it branches on the chest wall towards thick patches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so perform bloodletting on the widest branch or leave the lump at the spot of the aggregation you are adding to it, which is better and much safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform bloodletting on the chest wall, then you protect from the nerves that are located in that area on the chest wall, and stop your bloodletting at the point where you are performing it across, as if you were trying to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And when bloodletting is possible for you.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Understand that if blood release is prohibited; then you immerse the patient's hand in cold water and let the blood flow through it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletter misses in the first attempt, then try again with a small incision where the fluid comes out; and do not fear for his skill, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do it on the other side of the neck equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, you should leave the ankle at the hollow of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the young art of bloodletting is in the thigh area when it comes to using a cautery tool.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient enters bathed, and quickly strengthens their thigh on their side under the ankle above four fingers in a long, subtle bend, which only appears like this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you perform bloodletting there according to each organ that is possible for you and according to the transverse direction, which is better; or if you insert it through insertion or if you remove it through discharge, where the patient feels relief.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And she is in the heart homes many pleats; and if you find it, and there is no sensation of all, then bloodlet through a little part of it, and that which appears behind the lungs above the finger bones is that.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And watch out for the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow as you wish through the cautery tool.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then gently untie the constriction and place your hand on the bloodletting area, strengthen the location, which is quickly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using those [tools or techniques].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventosases can be made from horns, or from reeds, or from wool.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventosation is performed in two ways: one of them is like incision and the extraction of blood, and the other is ventosation after incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventosation that follows incision is done in two ways, whether it's with fire or after using fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And among the ventosas that are given with incision and blood extraction, there are 14 body locations. The first is where the ventosas are applied, which is in alnocratis, it being the last part of the head; and the middle is on each side of the neck. Ventosas for the chin leave the mandible further from the mouth; and ventosas for two spoons; and ventosas for alohoster, they're around the tip of the penis; and ventosas of two pokers, they're about three inches apart; and ventosas for two hollows; and ventosas for two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventosation does not extract blood but only from small thin veins in the flesh, and thus it does not lose its effectiveness like with bleeding; similarly to how pressing is done with bloodletting. Nor should ventosation be performed with fire or after using fire on any illness where the body is full inside until the entire body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessity requires the use of suction for illness or continuous discomfort, administer that throughout the entire menstrual cycle and at its end, in the middle part of it and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause for this is that in men, when there's an increase of blood circulation due to suction through ventosas and they find their illness serious and swollen; some find congestion and heat on their face, head, neck, and back. Others feel pain on their face, forehead, darkness and confusion in their breaths; some have a strong urge for ventosa application; those whose laughter is increased; those who feel blood taste in their mouth, or see blood in saliva; others experience extended sleep time, and those who vomit blood during sleep, or before it, or find other similar symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it occurs in any of those causes, especially if it's around the middle or later part of the menstrual cycle, then it commands that suction be performed as soon as possible after passing three hours of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the young art of neck suction is that when it affects severity in the head and combines with what's settled into the lungs; but it's important that this involves evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this suction is for the bloodletting location on the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it's not recommended to use that which is for rubbing fullness or in those who have catarrh, as it causes significant harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And thus it's not advisable to use that on old people, or on their heads where illnesses are present.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And for those who continue on that over it, it causes forgetfulness; thus you should order the suction tool user to keep their hand just slightly above the ventosa application areas, fearing the production of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Vineos of alcohol is in the bloodletting location of the dark vein and basilica veins: thus it causes asthma, constriction of airways, and division of the lung, as well as coughing and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it's recommended that the alcohol-soaked ventosa be slightly dampened; if left too dry, it can cause weakening in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And alcohol application during suction causes accidental head pain and eye problems, as well as migraines, excessive tearing up of the eyes, and pain in tooth roots; this is for bloodletting at the basilica location.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And tell the surgeon not to press their hand during incision so as not to puncture an artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Perform cupping on their mouth using alcohol, and the decay of the gum, resembling conditions within the mouth that are akin to dental issues, and place them in areas corresponding to bloodletting from hemorrhoids which are located at the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The cupping performed on the two spatulas corresponds to heat, which is done by filling with quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The cupping done inside the two parts of the furnace corresponds to youthfulness of bloodletting from three veins - the basilica, dark, and cephalic. These veins draw the blood from all those larger veins within the flesh, and these smaller veins of other veins into the larger ones where the suction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And tell the person doing cupping not to cut too deeply, where the area is stripped of flesh, and leave their nerves and arteries alone.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this cupping is like that which is done on the buttocks, corresponding to hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers, leaving them as they are.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And tell the cupper to apply strong suction, and that it should be rhythmic, as where there is a need for firm drying; and with gentle, strong suctioned cups, he should puncture during incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The cuppings on the inner thighs gradually decrease due to apparent diminution, drawing blood throughout the body and correspond to old pains of the lungs and the womb, and of the bladder; they induce menstruation, and correspond to uterine bleeding and abortion, as well as in locations corresponding to bloodletting from two ears, and throat; and it is also where bloodletting from two cavities takes place.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, movement weakens the entire body and causes fainting in men during movement.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And regarding cupping with hanging, youthfulness corresponds to the youthfulness of cupping on the two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the cupping is that you place the suction at the beginning view and continue for a while with heated suction, and do not extend the position of the cups, rather pause them slightly, remove them gradually, and ensure the fluids come to the area evenly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the flush of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you puncture with some heat, and subsequently adjust the location considering the distribution of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a person with rare flesh and veins, it's wise to puncture them only once or not at all, so that the area doesn't become inflamed.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And tell the cupper to expand the puncturing slightly and then let out a little, always maintaining easy suction.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the blood there is thickening, then it's advisable to puncture twice; in the first instance, open the pathway for filtration of blood and fluid.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second stage, examine the acquired extraction of thickened blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is highly viscous, then it's done that way to achieve the last stage.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gradually, when we want to extract blood little by little or a small amount, until we achieve one puncturing.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want extraction of thick blood, puncture with thick puncturing; and if we know that the blood is viscous, then it's wise to puncture through wave-like puncturing.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of puncturing until the depth of the thread is only as much as necessary.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if for someone whose thread is thick, hard, dark, and their veins are strained, it's wise to apply the cupping locations gently, widely, with more resolution; during summer time, you might use oil of Aloes or oil of violet, or oil of lemon zest, or oil from poplar; and in winter months, then consider oil of narcissus, or oil of linden, or oil of chamomile, or blood, alongside those corresponding areas.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, hard, then consider using turpentine oil, or oil of Balm, or oil of Aloes, or aniseed oil, alongside those corresponding areas.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the cupper has large veins with thin flesh, it's advised not to use oil, and consider using water or jasmine-scented water for washing around the areas of cupping near the cupping process, or water from lemons, or water from onions, alongside those corresponding areas.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood has a moisture content, wash his/her cupping areas with vinegar, or water infused with mint and sumac, alongside those corresponding areas.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash his/her cupping areas with old vinegar, or water from sage (which is a type of mint), that is majorana, or from decoction of anise, or chamomile, alongside those corresponding areas.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it's wise to have cupping done before bathing; in addition, consider providing rest from the water for an hour or two after applying cupping, and allow sleeping near the cupping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary that should be regulated before performing a blood-letting physician prior to cupping.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And when considering at the beginning: then if the cupper or the one who needs blood-letting has a fiery disposition and the blood is very hot and inflamed, it's wise to take cooling remedies, such as vinegar salads, lettuce with vinegar dressing, milk, quassia, julep, and alongside those corresponding areas.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And feed them with foods like fowl, game meats, cooked with herbs, and foods resembling theirs.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose complexion is pale, advise them to drink hawthorn tea or tea made from the ashes of burned nuts, and sumac; and that they be instructed to limit their intake of water and food, and serve fowl, hemp, rabbit meat, cooked game birds and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And have them drink more in windy weather and during bloodletting than the food they eat.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And have them drink for some hours before certain men take Tyrothricin or muscle medicines, such as magnesium or calcium, or in front of windiness or before bloodletting or nearby, so that their main members may be comforted and the pain become subtle; and do not have them take this scraping.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the windings that are cuts be woundings made over the stomach and gout, and on the navel, in the places of joints, and on the pubis area; these members do not endure cutting wounds upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it should not be desired by those for pain from member wounds, such as suction on the breasts in lactation disease of blood discharge from the milk glands; and use that to dissolve windiness that thickens body fluids, such as suction on the abdomen and navel; which stiffens the member and relieves the pain that solves windiness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it is sucked over the lungs if they happen to be filled or overflow, through the force of suction the patient empties and removes the phlegm from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly when it is sucked over the stomach and liver, it relieves windiness in those confined places.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These suction treatments are administered regularly with oil alone; some are given with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some treatments involve water baths in milk diseases.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the suction is full and produces a lot of pus, so it's plain water or water with herbs suitable for the water.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Procedure for applying suction with heat: make the size of the opening like two fingers, according to how we have made it; and the amount of heat should be as much as a palm's length; place it at the left side, in the location on the circuit, the full length of it, let the tube be small according to the quantity that enters one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	An incision is made of elderberry or citrus, with large cuts, lion's, equal and round ones, in such a way that does not allow the member to move its position upon it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the highest point of the cross-section of elderberry or iron, where a candle is placed over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this suction is much larger than that which we have described; and the slight amount of medicine according to milk diseases and the state of whoever uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and exhausted people are different from those for young adults and larger individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this suction cup over the member is to spread the heat from the firewood decently in front of a small candle of beeswax, and place that on the middle point of the cross-section at the middle location of the suction cup, so that the fire may be lit near that part to prevent burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed over the patient's member, and let there be only the one we have said about on that tube; when having suction cups and they do not require the one we said to remain and vaporize upon that tube, then that suction will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And according to their custom ignite the firewood, and repeat this if you need more of that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	May be in suction therapy for milk diseases where there is no cross-section or tube, and only water is used, it is not administered unless it is full of water, and placed solely over the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it is for it: and this suction cup, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter XCVII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodlettings are not administered on swollen members but in the members where it is impossible to position suction cups, due to their smallness, such as the buttocks and gums, or similar ones; or on naked member of flesh, such as that one and nose and similar.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting suction cups in the watery bases of pus-filled areas.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be left in water for the day and night until they subside, and ensure no cause of infection within those stomachs; and they should be evacuated from the body during bloodletting and suction treatments; and they should be rubbed on the patient's member until it turns red; and they should be placed upon them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And as they are full and in case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if oil from the area can be applied with suction, it is better to do so during youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with warm water and afterwards use a poultice of water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the patient's chest has extended towards the location of the blood vessels, and they are causing a build-up, then you immerse a cloth in cold water, and place it over the area where the discharge occurs.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the sickness is multiplied, then apply over them vitriol that has been trisulfated, or similar substances to those of the stiptics, until the sickness subsides; or let the seeds of boiled fava beans be laid on the area, and leave them where the fava beans adhere, and when the sickness subsides.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, perform the operation of bloodletting, whenever it's possible to move those parts.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is forbidden by suspension, then rub the area with recent sickness or place a needle in the areas where the sickness causes pain; and keep them in that position, so as soon as any pain is felt, it lifts immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to relieve them, apply a little of powdered castor oil or salt or ashes over those areas, and cauterize immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	So begins the treatment for the latter part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter discusses necessary operations in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, realize that many doctors and common people, as well as those who do not deserve the works of the Ancients or read them even a single letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scholars in our land is privatized; and I have not forgotten what deserves attention over time; and I have not cited anything that was acquired, but rather due to the length of reading from the works of the Ancients and studying their understanding, extracting knowledge from those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And let him direct towards experimentation and study throughout his life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter all that concerns my science and on which I have conducted my experiments; thus I will abbreviate this for you others and deliver it from the occupation of lengthening; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and show it at the end of declaration; and form it into various forms of disturbances that are administered in those, as was done with declaration, so as I did in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The summary and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from which it is necessary to start before we begin recalling fractured members and various ones for each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us call in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of speech; and the chapters whose understanding leads the craftsmen to begin with the art and stand on the truth of those; these are you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus say that when an accident happens to a bone fracture or dislocation or twist or compression, then you should consider at the beginning for bloodletting or applying something cooling there, or any other time, if no contraindication is present, such as vertigo, or it's where the accident occurs, or rather in decrepitude, or it's a time of strong heat, or of strong coldness.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with food of herbs in cold water and rabbit meat and crabs; and prohibit large meats and fill yourself up with foods and all foods that fill the veins with sickness, so you are safe from a boil if you have a cautery ready, and if you don't fear an effusion in the body.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original position as they usually are.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you should feed the patient with nutritious foods that are heavy and dense in consistency, such as bread cooked in water, rice, apples, fish, belly of cattle, hoes, fresh meat, and similar things, and on this regimen there is coagulation of pus from the fracture more gently and well.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones grow when they are in the young adults and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continuously growing according to their nature by drying out their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are growing and continuously growing according to their nature all the time by drying out those limbs, and they are growing and consolidating those that are from them at the end of childhood, such as the bones of little infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and connects over all the broken bones throughout every cause similar to gum in which thickness adheres and strengthens it while they are being coagulated and solidified, within periods of becoming stronger and tougher at the beginning, so as not to prohibit any cause during his work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, those that have heaviness, viscosity, and thickness as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Various types of fractures according to the diversity of body parts.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fractures are various according to the diversity of bones, a fracture of the jaw bone is different from a skull bone fracture; and a foot bone fracture is different from a thigh bone fracture; similarly, all other bones are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will conclude with a recollection of every species of fracture, detailed in its chapter separately from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Various types of fracture within the body.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	Various types of bone fracture occur in their joints; some are curved fractures or those that happen in the stars; and sometimes, fractures occur according to the length of the bone: these include fractures related to the back and stars as well as non-related ones, such as when writing is prepared, there is a fracture at the tip and disruption in the head, and there is a small crack fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every type, there is a specific remedy in the restoration according to the memory of each one distinguished in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Various signs of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thus, the bone fracture is known: it is the twist of it, and that prominence and appearance to touch sensation, and those when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent twist or sensation when you touch it while pressing the bone during your palpation, and the patient does not experience much pain, then it is not here that the fracture occurs.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there could be a twist or small crack, where you must palpate the area with your hand and during compression of all sides; make a pause about it considering the medicines which have memory to that moment which corresponds to that place; and then straighten it through subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the place is curved and does not split into two or otherwise does not occur in the back, as it swells up entirely from its circumference, then you should begin correcting your time starting with where the inflammation appears from the cautery burn.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if there appears a burn blister at it, then smooth that for several days until the blister disappears; and then equalize that according to any method you can use for elevation and treatment.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and realignment of it is a more delicate task than when you encounter back in bone.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the memory of this remedy.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the bone it's back injuries, then an extension of this broken limb from two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or on two strings or with one string and a hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And if you place your position at which you pause the limbs at their equal according to their natural figure, while spreading the parts from the broken member, then make sure that you return those additions on your own and according to any method you can apply in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And watch to ensure that you don't cause damage to the patient due to your action or injury during operation; and make sure according to your ability that you apply one bone against another in its best forms, as they are companions.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And know that during that useful time you touch it with your hand, and if you find any different cause here, correct that and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some old doctors do when performing operations that can lead to burn blisters due to their actions, or cause contraction in the limbs, as we have seen this through their operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect closely, achieve equilibrium and good operation with a tight constraint of that limb, provide rest and tranquility; instruct the patient about this and make them avoid touching that during their nighttime vigil and sleep, observe its changes and movements, take note of its weakness, account for all of its actions through your virtue; and wait to see if the position of the limb is in a place where pain can be assured, which causes it when felt in the disposition of the limb's position or injury; then ensure that you rearrange that into another position of that without feeling any pain; and take care such that the position of that that one is straight and equal, so as not to cause twisting in the limb during restoration.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constraint of the broken limb is what I've prescribed; for you should know that limbs are diverse in their smallness and largeness and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And among those that are small, like the arm and similarly easy ones, then know that the envelop should be of thin elastic fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And those that are large, like the thigh or chest, know that in such cases there should be a firm and hard envelop, so that the elasticity of the material connects to the large and strong limb from all sides with equal constraint, as it does not allow for marks.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin your process of equalization, make a moderately comfortable pause at that, above the site of that fracture with three envelops or four according to which member it is; and strengthen your hand slightly on that membrane.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to that part closer above the site of the fracture, and strengthen gradually so as not to cause your constraint where you have strengthened the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen a little the envelop at the site of the fracture, and gradually soften the constraint as you take hold of a large portion of the place.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bend and envelop that other wound over the broken site with an envelop, and then go to those envelops closer to the last part of the fracture; and in your operation focus on constraint and softening in the envelop as we have mentioned in the first envelop above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the arches of the foot a cloth or strip on which matches the curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and if not, do not press any cause in it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another object upon it, and properly cover these star-shaped envelopes just made, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area. Then place on that which contains the abscess; and let that one rest for a few days; and then strengthen over those stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stars of the cane's tip be made in red, or formed wisely. Or they may be made from wood, or from palm leaves; and each star should have this size and shape:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the star placed over that fracture is much thicker and smaller than the other stars. The length of the star according to its size and fineness as read in members; then strengthen on those stars with another object according to your first stricture; and place them decently upwards according to what we said about stricture, it being your stricture more according to the location of the fracture, and the longer you extend from the fracture, heal the stricture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and use many of them. If the threads are thick, like I've seen during an operation where others placed those cord-like threads during stricture, that's a great mistake, when it was equality with respect to stricture.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are not convenient because you will not be able to achieve the stricture with those that you want. And let there be no more than one span between each star.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is laid out at the ends of the stars near the stricture in their locations, then place these on the foot or with padding inside that will not harm them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures occur due to disease and disruption in the chain, and I will come back with a reminder in that respect in the Capitol according to uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken member should be strengthened with stars on the first day; the reason is that when the member is large it may not allow you to press onto the stars but rather around three or seven days, or more, according to your confidence of a potential abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasterers among which the ancients worked, who placed them over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of plastering as briefly explained in the restoration of fractures, suitable for complicated issues and mostly for women and children, which should be done on what does not receive heat or friction: and you take corn flour powder, which is the essence that floats out from the movement of the grains in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And do it like this, rather than sifting it with egg whites, and apply the preparation not thick or fine; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for treating fractures and dislocations: mix assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, anula, and myrrh, which is prepared with one thousand grains of salvage, all weighing a drachm each; add five drachms of frankincense and thirty drachms of aloes; use twenty drachms of almond oil or album from the egg if the patient's skin is irritated; then apply this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and strengthens men's muscles.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for plastering which helps with fractures and twists: mix myrrh and white alum at a ratio of one drachm each, frankincense and crocus root in the ratio of five drachms, acacia in the ratio of six drachms, and Armenian madder in the ratio of twenty drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these are ground in the mortar with the twisted matter, they are sifted and mixed with water or egg white and then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of treating joints and bones detached from their places, and accidental pain occurs in those and at cracks and fractures: take wool thread, immerse it in warm vinegar and oil, then place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, not just restoration is present, but also an application of a cautery and expulsion of pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and poppy leaves; mix them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortened plastering method for administering restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining pus: use essence of aloe vera, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour from poppies, all in equal parts. They are three times wine and one cup of vinegar, if the member has not been cut.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it has been cut, then use water infused with elderberry or just water and apply it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering pus for quicker resolution than the first one, when an abscess occurs and requires bone restoration: use aloe vera essence, garlic seeds, dandelion, honey suckle, wild pansy, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts. They should be three times and then each cup with water from artichoke or twice with water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the color of its rest.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Ypocras does not divide in his free text that should be placed on the flaccid limb requiring restoration, so a cerotta (a kind of bandage) is made of wax and oil rather than any other reason; it's recommended to keep it at a medium consistency between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Gualia is seen as being placed over the broken limb for its restoration and among the causes of which drying occurs due to quality heat are such like myrrh, ashes and resemble those reasons that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A plastering method that alleviates injury and pain: use powdered ashes, burnt bones or elm bark, aloe vera, salt, all in equal parts. They should be ground, sifted, and then mixed to make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity depends on how much inflammation is and should be slightly reduced; you need to consider if there was no pain or swelling, nor has the bone been broken, then it's not moved for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is strong pain or swelling at the spot, then you should treat it immediately or move that (the affected part), and keep your plaster on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen cloth and a sea sponge that is wet with vinegar; immerse that in warm water, then wash the affected area until the pain stops and the pain is soothed. Then lay down to rest for an hour; place over it wool thread immersed in vinegar and oil or boiled oil, cover it overnight until you are sure of using a cautery, and ensure the swelling of the limb subsides, soothing the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gradually loosen that tightness with small plasters and do not strain your first constraint, apply them gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you notice that the pus and rigor and pain and swelling and all accidents have already subsided completely, and you need neither plaster nor constriction, then proceed in this way as you did at the beginning evenly.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause for the limb from those we have mentioned, then do not move it but wait approximately three to four or five days. And some of these treatments should be left for twenty days according to how it appears from the ease in moving the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of flesh over there.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the constriction more than in your first constriction overall, and adjust to the increase in the thickness of the meat's artery, according to when memory returns for you.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you notice that the fracture site has dried and weakened more than it was before, then know that nutrition can no longer reach there; hence, cover that with vinegar water throughout your treatment. And do this for all three days. Then slightly adjust the constriction, and through this operation to the limb brings about nutrition, it is healed lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	As the people who restore bone fractures in limbs do another treatment when it is not restored properly from the beginning, according to how it progresses and is restored according to its curvature, this is an error according to their operations, causing great fear; if one follows these instructions to widen the old ones in their texts and applies them to this work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of theirs do that, for which it is more reasonable that this does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Section Two: About fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are impacts and their figures are various, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by impact from space, where the impact stays throughout the bone inside the cranium, which leaves the bone alone; as if it were in the shaft, and for this reason, this type is named 'ascial'. Or the space hits a part of the bone, hitting the flesh of the body without passing through its rear end. And this kind of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The size of these two fractures is either large or small, and concerning the type of fracture - one that is compressive or expansive. The cause for this involves impact upon or striking into bone, and they resemble each other in their appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is one that nearly reaches the eye socket, leaving damage to it; or it occurs within the bone itself. The size of these types of fractures can either be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And when the fracture occurs within the bone, in its subtle depth like hair, thus this type of fracture is named 'capillary'.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is the fracture that occurs through impact or striking of bone, resembling it in appearance, causing some layer of the bone to enter into the parts inside, and it occurs at the concave area like what happens when there's an impact on nails resulting from their striking, with the exit part entering into the parts inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this type of fracture mostly occurs in wet bodies, such as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And among all these types of separated fractures, they are like stars that are separate.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I shall recount all this in its proper place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these types of fracture through their detection and examination, as well as the investigation into their causes and symptoms of corrupted flesh that are present on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known for being revealed on the bone, and it is cleaned off, and its edges are inspected, whereupon a black fracture appears.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's condition, and if any symptoms indicate clear meaning related to health loss, such as vomiting due to cholera, swelling, loss of understanding, vocal obstruction, fainting, acute fever, nasal irritation, discomfort in those areas, and signs of conditions in major positions. Indeed, they are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter non-accidental symptoms, you expect health, then you start the treatment for them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	And the reason is that when you come upon a patient in their condition as they are, especially during winter days, then you should study at the bone's edge on the twelfth day for complete position.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it's during summer days, then you should examine the bone's edge on the seventh day, because what is left of the bone after being damaged by the eye socket, and accidents that we have recounted can occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the eye socket, affecting parts that are narrow and expansive, then you should insert the divided part and rub it as I will instruct you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And this is when you examine the head of the patient that is affected, uncovering upon the bone according to custom and manner as possible for you depending on the shape of the injury, and it should be lighter on the head.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if this occurs to you, you must detect the bone, pus from infection or abscess formation, then you oppose against it according to what suits. And you fill the place with draps soaked in an infusion and rubbed oil, causing rest for the injury inside until the abscess is numbed; and be sure of blood flow; then start around the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should follow one of two operational methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incision instrument, and this is its form: Then you administer another incision tool, one slightly later than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer another incision tool slightly further than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should know that there are various names for different incision tools, some of which are longer than others; and some of them have shorter blades compared to the others, and they end in a sharp point. They can be made from iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in impact on the incision for not damaging the head and causing injury to it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should pierce at the circuit in front of it before administering any incision tools at its tunnels; these are named as tunnels that do not go deep.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not named so merely when they do not reach the end of the bone's test bed up to that which is close to it, for then at the tunnel there would be a rounded end or margin over what remains of its sharp head similar to a margin or small circle. This must prevent being submerged and going beyond the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is advantageous for you to use a large number of these tunnels, each of which corresponds to the thickness of every bone, while having the tip of this tunnel be sharp at all times. The quantity in length and width should match the thickness of this particular bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the method for three types of operations: when you are piercing through the bone's fracture line, you place the instrument on the bone and move it back and forth with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated; then adjust the tool to another spot, and hold it in such a way that all the quantity of the thickness of the ray or approximately this is removed.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you should insert the instrument in such a way that it is between each slice of the bone, making a delicate pus under it as you lift it off, just like we have said, while excavating the bone, or with your hand, or using any other tool with which you might be equipped, like small forceps and similar instruments.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And ensure that with all caution, the cutting instrument does not touch any artery.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have perforated the bone and separated it from the artery if this continues in the patient, and extract it, take care to press and equalize that on the roughness of what is inside the bone at another instrument similar to a cutting tool, but rather use one that is more coarse and delicate than other cutting tools.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any piece of bones that escapes and sticks, then take it with ease on the part where you are supposed to work with instruments; then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is easier and far from pain, as Galien and Laузec performed with great skill; this is what he said: it's necessary for you in the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the spot where the fracture is more violent and more obvious. Once you have discovered that part and placed your hand on the tip of this instrument that moves slowly and happily, here's how to proceed:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the conical part is hard and does not touch any organ, while the sharp part is at your fingertips in two directions along its length, as you have seen; that the conical part should be close to the artery against the face of the sharp part when it meets the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike the cutting instrument from one side with a slight force until you cut all the bone at ease as it has moved, and be sure of your balance so that it doesn't hit in any way the accident you fear; indeed, if the surgeon14 was the root cause of all these things and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And when any organ attached to the bone of the patient is broken in certain parts of the bone, strike that from you at the tip of this conical instrument, and remove it easily; what is removed from you is free of your nerves and arteries.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone's fracture doesn't penetrate into the skin, and what is separated or remains of the bone is its surface, with its roughness and delicate parts, then take care to smooth that roughness and eliminate those delicate bumps with small razors you have prepared for this purpose, in various quantities so that it's possible for you to apply these according to their convenience and use the right pus from them as per where you lose your operation on this broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And ensure that when you start to manage the bone with your razors, you use more of the coarse pus from those razors. Then proceed using the delicate pus of it, and don't stop doing this until you've been able to administer the coarse pus and the delicate pus of all these.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And similarly in any other small blood vessel or subtle fractures, ensure that you provide treatment according to what you lose when correcting it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is why the treatment isn't applied over all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have shown on what we've written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin gets stretched when you excavate the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound, immerse it in oil rubbed on, and place it over the wound's opening; and then take another piece of cloth folded or triple-folded, immerse it in vinegar and oil rubbed on, and place this over the first layer, providing a gentle pressure that doesn't hurt the artery. And then apply lard to this area, without pressing too hard, just enough as per what is required by the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the abscess rupturing; then remove it and start administering medicines that prevent excessive drying, such as linseed oil, flour of wheat, powder of ashes and aristolochia, and other similar remedies.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it's that you use this medicine as powder to be sprinkled on the wound when they are dry; in general, administer to that all medicine with properties which should cleanse and not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And observe according to your wisdom that the wound in your treatment should be clean; and it should not be in the viscera of ointment or any other place; nor let you introduce toxicity there; when placed on the skin membrane, it corrupts it and poisons that area, leading to a malignant mischief near the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens at the artery of the head, as in this case when dealing with the bone and especially if the treatment is improperly applied, there appears a dark color on its surface; thus consider now if any mishaps occur to the patient that we've said, know that they are harmful throughout.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no occurrence of blackness but only due to the medicine that has been applied upon it, and it results from the effectiveness of that medicine causing that blackness, then you should take a portion of honey and a part of roasted oil. and place those lines on a cloth, then apply that to the head; and prepare a cure with the spices of medicine so that it becomes healed.
Capitol .iii.	Take three parts.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken but rather two parts at once have pierced upwards, or one of those occasionally ruptured ones, through where there are two bones in you, and the part left is cartilaginous, not broken, it does not hit you but causes inflammation and deformity and nasal obstruction.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If only one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert that small object into your nose, and adjust that fracture internally to your thumb's indication, and also on the outside of it, so that when it returns the nose follows its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this yourself with ease, and watch that you don't damage the patient further with your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upward part of the nose, and your thumb doesn't reach there, then you should equalize at the tip of the ray where there is a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make as though to do this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And restore him with the treatment of his nose on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait about seven or one-third of the duration for pus to form after cauterization.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth near the tip of the nose if the fracture is in one part or place two cushions, if the fracture is in two parts. In the cushion(s), fill up with as much thickness as fills your nose's nostril(s).
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And do as some ancient restorers instructed that the cushions be enveloped in a bandage, and are changed every day, but I can't see it done; you should have the cloth be enveloped in egg white mousse mixed with powder of ground bones; then let each cushion soften until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some ruptures should be inserted into the nose instead of cushions, risking an accumulation of pus enveloped in a lion's skin cloth; and if you already have nasal fracture with intense pus, so that the patient cannot breathe.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this treatment is not necessary for you; if you want to, do it like this way, and if you prefer, do cushions.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another pus-filled cauterization occurs, plaster your nose with cerotic or with a fat-oil mixture, or with vinegar.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If there is no cauterization pus, then you should plaster that outside with saffron flour and with bone powder mixed with egg white; and place a lion's skin over it, and do not disturb the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken in minor fractures or they are constricted, then you should split over them, and remove those with instruments suitable for them; and prepare the incision area, and cure that with what promotes flesh formation and consolidation, and with plasters that are appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an inflammation occurs inside the nose, then you should treat that with cushions and administer lead tubes until it is fully healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Take four parts.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	For the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw bone is broken and the fracture is not due to inflammation, look if the fracture is only external, and is not broken into two parts but curved inside, in which case its perception is mild.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And then do this: if the fracture is in the right side, insert your left thumb into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, insert your right hand's index finger. Guide the curvature of the fracture inside with ease towards the outside parts from the other hand's side of the bone; do this appropriately on both sides.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to rightness until it is possible for their equilibrium.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is tooth pain accompanied by dislocation, then strengthen those you expect to break into gold or silver or glass; place a plaster over the broken jaw and also on the cloth, another cloth in a decent diamond pattern, or a piece of wood as long as your jaw; then lay that above according to how your tooth sensitivity is perceived and make sure it fits for application so that it isn't destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, also pause his food for lion's service.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that it has been altered in some way, then do this and loosen that on the third day; and correct whatever has been altered of him and plaster him with bone powder, with egg white, or with saffron flour, since you will have removed all his cerotic, and place a lion's skin wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then confirm that this plaster is attached to him, and the position of the bone is not altered, let it be, do not remove it until he is healed and strengthen the fracture; for this fracture should be strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess should happen after a pointed cautery, then administer what we have said about treated abscesses within their relief until it is healed, and remove that abscess again.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is in bone splinters, then consider whether they are separate pieces or stuck together, then you delicately remove those splinters with what suits and align them during their removal from the muscles.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds of the plague are wide, then you enlarge them with the bloodletting according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those splinters, and if that wound is not healed after, then widen the wound if it is wide; and if not, place one of the plasters that suits with this under it until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Capitation v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Restoration in the case of a hanging scapula.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Treated abscesses involve breaking the scapula at the front of the joint, and this fracture occurs in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it is broken, if it separates, or if it separates into two parts other than splinters; and this is easier for the restoration of it; or if it happens with splinters in you, and it is difficult for the restoration of it; or it is so that the fracture is in bone.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is in bone, you must have two ministers present, so one has the assistant and follows the broken scapula, and the other extends the neck over that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And when you have corrected the fracture with your own words until it has taken on the form according to its context, and is not in a slight or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then consider that you place your hand on the patient's hip bone pocket with a cloth or wool padding, and its size according to the quantity of your need; extend and elevate the scapula and tighten the pocket with your hand until you correct the fracture as it extends.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the scapula to the parts outside, then consider that it is turned upwards on its neck, and place your hand over the patient's muscle with a cushion of medium size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister places his hand on the muscle of the patient at the parts between them until the bone of the scapula is elevated as it is in front towards its back, and then you correct the fracture and align that with your own words.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel splinters of the scapula and they are difficult to extract, then consider that you cut above it and remove those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, then you devise incision of it with one of the scalpels which you have equipped for this purpose, since you had placed your scapula on the muscle that serves the chest; and this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spatula of which this is the curvature; and its width according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Let the length of it be according to what is possible in the operation; that there are two ends thusly, and one end should be wide while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound you have incised when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide and there is a certainty of an abscess with a point, then adjust both edges of the wound for suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess with a point, then use the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the wound's cut.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess with a point occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil to it and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And the narrowing of the bone when it is in a wound and its section, you place plaster made from mill flour and albumen of egg on it, then place a cloth soaked with water over that. If needed, take an inhalation, so it is taken by those Saracens, which should be long and have a width like one palm or around that; and you place a double layer of powder above the water and plaster.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, that the table does not get stuck under the broken bone; and consider that you see the hip bone every day, so when the swelling has softened or you see that the table is already hardened, then you correct this and strengthen the connection.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on their neck, and keep their heartbeat pulsation steady. You should have them sleep with a small pillow under their head at night; so that when they are in bed, lift the helper from their left side, thus lifting the fracture of the furcula muscle or having their arms hanging by their side.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not release the inflammation if it happens suddenly in that area or in an abscess, within about twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster when you have seen the face of the patient to that water, and adjust in the constriction and restore it and smooth until the restoration is completed and the fracture of the furcula has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some people perform exercises at intervals of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Recovery from shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A spatula tart is broken in the left side of the patient and it's not breaking the patient but only the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken in the patient's body - and it breaks in the middle of its body - and is not known except through touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture forces you to prepare for it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of art which is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the spot powdered album from the hen's egg and stop the lion; and then place powdered flour of doubled cloth; and then place over the patient a stripe of thin table fabric according to the amount of the spatula, or more if necessary.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May it be so if the stripe is curved in some of the spots of the spatula, then you match that curvature with lion's wool, and then adjust the stripe according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen from above with human saliva for digestion and from the firmness of the stripe until it is not swollen in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the inflammation on each day; and all times when it is softened, apply another time and strengthen it and adjust the stripe if it becomes swollen in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their left side there.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in .25 (which might be a typo and could refer to 'and a quarter').
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the inflammation, and that you know securely that that comes from the bones where it began should not be feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you are dealing with the part of the bone and you place your thumb on it, then you divide over them, keep the thumb, do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula from the danger of abscess in the cautery, if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Recovery from the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, in some occasions, is broken in the middle of its body and that's how it fractures; however, the ends of it must not be crushed or broken.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents when it is broken in its middle, it tends towards the parts inside and happens to it great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, nausea and vomiting; and it becomes known in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the recovery of the foot is that you have the patient lie on their back and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press into the muscles of the body, adjust the ribs according to two pairs of ribs, refine in the operation, and do it according to every manner which is possible for this, so as it returns the shape of the bone according to its contour.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place over the body the plaster and cover it, placing a thin table cloth of leather or felt on top, so that you wrap that in cloth; then refine by spreading that over the broken bone without swelling; adjust according to roundness on the back for some times, strengthen with firmness of the bandage; and then consider the swelling at all times, and when it softens strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity requires you to disintegrate that, or causes corrosion, pain, or abscess which happens in the area, then remove and release that, discard the plaster, correct whatever happens according to the method of treatment for this; and reduce the plaster, if you see that its shape has changed; adjust to the bandage until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Recovery from the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the breakage of the ribs happens only in large areas that resemble both; and from the ends of them on the front part, they do not cause that friction with those because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of him is not hidden from your sense; you should inquire about his feelings, as well as his complaints.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be as swift that you widen the fracture in his bones according to possible methods, so long as it is contained when it's being pushed, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken parts with metal plates, if it is necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is descending within, then it begets intense pain and puncturing in him, as with the pain that occurs when someone has wept or exerted themselves, and through this they place the metal over the wound; and he experiences difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to irritation. This type of injury has a hard healing process.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients were skilled in those remedies for motion sickness.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say among themselves: when you eat food in the stomach that causes inflation and wind, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outwards.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we avoid causing such an insignificant reason to generate a pus-filled blister; if it does happen, then help in that regard.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They say some among them that the wind should be held above and near to rub with strength; it's akin to reasoning, but indeed, it is feared that the wind carries excesses away due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They say some among them: when the place is covered with wool that has already been immersed in cautery oil, and powders are placed between the ribs where it's full, to make the heat equal as you wrap that according to roundness; and then treat the patient with digestive grief relief medicine and remedies.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if causing intense constriction makes the patient suffer, and metal is placed over the wound with a puncture made by teeth, we fear for the patient; then you should cut above the place, uncover the broken rib from the chest, and then prepare the instrument that follows this tradition, which I will use to guide the hand as I perform the operation, and remove it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when adjusting the two lips of the wound, if it's large, with stitches, and then treat that area with plaster until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if pus forms internally, then you should scrape and insert powders in oil rubbed and place them on the spot, and treat the patient with what heals inside the pus.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it's laid to rest over the side where he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Regarding the restoration of fractures in the thoracic and cervical spine.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some symptoms may indicate a fracture in the bones of the neck, and similarly for those affecting their ligaments, as well as for the thoracic vertebrae.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider this: if you notice their hands already softened, numb and dead, and cannot move, extend or strengthen them; or when you press those onto your own fingers or pierce them with a needle and do not feel any pain there, then understand that it is not healing, and during such states they are fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you can move those and feel the constriction in your fingers and a piercing, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover through treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similarities with this in the thoracic vertebrae and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And when you notice that they are already softened, it's similar to what happens in the hands. If when touching your own back, you experience wind and loss of appetite according to their will; or if some symptoms show them lying on their back and trying to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal. Therefore, do not hope for his recovery.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no cause of those happens, the cause is better and more minor.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for this involves working on reducing the heat of the pus-filled blister you place on the ligament torn in oil rubbed, or with hot water compresses; apply this to certain points throughout the day until the heat from the pus-filled blister subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the plasters soothing and breathable, with strength over it; and instruct the patient to rest and remain calm and not sleep on the side where they find pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the ligament of the bone is torn or any cause that separates from him, then you should cut through the chain and extract that bone; then adjust the two lips of the wound, with stitches if it's large; then treat that area with some ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the end of the bone is broken in the buttocks, which is at the tip of the tailbone, then you should insert your right hand's palm into the buttock and widen the broken bone with your other hand as it can be done according to the second equation; then place over him a plaster and iron sand if needed; then strengthen that area.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel torn ligaments in him, then cut over that area, leave it there, and treat the wound with the treatment prescribed until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capitol X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Regarding the restoration of the girth.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the wide limbs are broken, and when they break, their fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those parts and inscribed along their length; it declines within; and happens to cause pain in the spot and piercing sensation, and the change becomes numb when there's a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration for him is that you extend your hand over that within which is above the fracture, which is the shape of him.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of him, then you encircle that according to what suits you by equation inside which his shape is similar to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the length or that which declines within, then you have the patient lie on his belly under which your preparation for restoring that fracture is ready.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have encircled that, pause on him plastered, and place your hand on that spot of wood or bone, and strengthen with a tight grip on the one which do not fear piercing of fracture nor movement of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And encircle the cavity with that which fills within where that receives a grip according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his two or neglects his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if pus occurs in the cauterized spot, then you cease extension of him and his restoration within which that pus is sedated, and pause on him that which sedates that as it proceeds; and soon return to restoring him, and strengthen that thus like a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there's an issue in the mouth or teeth are broken, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On restoring a fracture of the assistant.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade in front of the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it's broken, restoring him is in one of two ways, of which you take wooden planks of moderate hardness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if there are laths in both extremities two ligaments, then have that suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on one pillow; and place his broken arm outside over the pole until it reaches to his nipple in the middle part of which is attached the curvature of the pole.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend above that something heavy or the doctor extends that over his own parts. And direct the doctor to examine the fracture with his hands where the fracture returns according to a cover.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be raised on his own neck and suspend the collarbone over his ligament; and command two servants to each one of them have what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other holds his broken part. And let every one extend according to his own part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture on ligaments and over that on another ligament, and each of the two servants extends according to their own parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then cover it making half of the ligament reach to the nipple and the other part of the fracture place on the shoulder blade.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder, then cover it making the ligament reach that spot and on that shoulder.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Encircle that with ease and proceed the work, and when it's equal according to how you go and is applied by a good application, then strengthen that if there doesn't occur pus in the cauterized spot.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	And if pus in the cauterized spot occurs, then smooth the constriction within on day seven, and pause on him with lint which has been gauze-bound on day four and oil rubbed inside where the pus rests, and then you strengthen that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen that is to place plaster on the fracture, and then pause envelopment of new cloth around the plaster; and adjust his arm over this assistant, and let his hand open over his own muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen over this assistant his arm in case that his arm is at a location of stars, otherwise forbid from any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use of stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that is what you pause on over the fracture this star which is more ready and stronger than other stars; and pause between each star the width of the digit, and make the length of the stars according to the breakage with addition of three digits from every part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the stars on this constriction which I said at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your constriction over the place of the fracture be stronger.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the pus is increased the fracture should be less constricted.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And then if you determine the position of the stars and the constriction as we have said when restoring the limb to its original position in the time you restore it, then do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear pus in the cauterized spot, then let the constriction and the stars be on day seven as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that nothing happens suddenly or swelling; or it's forbidden for food to reach the limb by disposition of excess constriction; and therefore correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	And if you are confident that no cause will happen from this, then don't loosen the ligature but rather three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient lie on their back, and have their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on top a helper tray full of evenly spread wool, and consider at all times throughout the night or day whether the figure of the broken member is not dissolving or has not hardened, or if the ligament has softened; therefore, adjust this completely according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And let the food of the patient rest according to the order in which we have placed them, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning so it strengthens; and then cook the food for him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	That the strength of the helper and the patient's leg lasts for forty days; then cook until they are tender, and administer baths which are medicated with ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is already rubbed out, then do not disturb that ligament and wait between days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is made up of two bones which are called the humeri; one is small and it's called the head, and the other is large and it rests on top of the smaller one, coming out from below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And a light break affects only the larger humerus, or the smaller one, and they both bend at times.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller humerus is broken on top, then its restoration is lighter, and its healing is even lighter.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the arm bone is broken from below, the fracture of him is bad, and his healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it's even worse when both bones break at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the small one from above, then it's convenient for the doctor to restore him, making minor extensions in order to facilitate its equalization until that point is reached.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If it's the large one that bends, then it's necessary to make greater extensions.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both humeri bend at the same time, then you should do the extraction more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And make sure to place the hand figure for him while restoring his arm and extending it over a pillow, with his wrists above all else. Moreover, let your other commands be lower than that, and have his thigh hanging over a dropped seat.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a pillow in front of him at the height or inclination of his body, so that his thigh doesn't strain during work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then, the minister should extend the arm from below towards his own hand or ligament, and another minister should extend similarly upwards.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor should align the bones so that they reduce according to the best figure that is possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are any deformities in the bone structure, then you must reduce all of it to its place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears any isolated deformity that interferes with the continuity and is not within your hope for restoring him, then you should treat him according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is due to an injury, I have already addressed this in a separate chapter, and therefore take care of him from that point onwards.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if it happens that an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then you lay out a cloth with a wick made of roasting oil and white beeswax, making it between thick and subtle, and cover this cloth over him with a subtle bandage in which the abscess is allowed to drain; and then leave the wick on, and apply a plaster made from clay and butter powder, and place a star above that. And the star should be placed closer and more firmly over that fracture.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of stars on the arm varies depending on the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one humerus or both at the same time.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage on the site of the fracture more firmly and more forcefully, and when it is as far up or below that fracture site, leave the bandage slightly damp according to the treatment you are following at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that cover the fracture should be moist and damp, not hard or coarse, and the thread with which they are sewn is of a moderate thickness between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the ligament for some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises that requires correction, just like what happens to the member itself, then you should immerse the member in cold water until that pain subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member rest without being strained, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandage has already softened and the bone has been reduced to those points, then correct all of this according to your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess bandage, then you should make that area slightly softer and leave it for some days until the nutrition flows towards that point, and then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If nothing happens to the thigh as those we have mentioned, then you should not allow it to be loose within about twenty days or roughly that period.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And have the patient's hand suspended by their natural flexibility of movement, and make them lie on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Know that this fracture is restored within xxx days or in xxxii days, or a slight injury is restored within xxviii days, and all this depends on the constitution of the body and the dispositions of the nature.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Regarding the restoration of fractures in the hand and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the hand and the joints of the fingers there is a kind of fracture, and it does not occur to them but due to wear and tear.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it occurs in the hand fracture or strain, then guide that the patient should lay on their back and in front of them stretch as equally as possible, and place the patient's hand over that stretched out.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And have the surgeon extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those within them for good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then guide that you place the plaster and the bandage, if it does not cause an abscess. And have the straw placed under according to the amount of space, and you have already enveloped that in a linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the twist is in the inner parts going into the palm, then make a semblance of a bowl of cloth, and command the patient to hold that against their twisted palm; have it strengthened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the straw of the heart is in the cloth on which it rests, so that the heart can be applied to the palm; strengthen that according to what you guide.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the outer parts, then guide that you place under straw and another piece of straw for the part leaving on the palm, so that the hand can be opened and straight; have the constriction placed, as if the hand twists between the fingers towards the wrist.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if it occurs a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then when you hold that finger down, adjust it according to what you guide and have it strengthened on the palm. If you wish, place a small piece of straw straight for making the fracture elevated and not causing pain.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle section, or on the index finger, or on the ring finger, then adjust and hold it against that finger where you place that one; or they are all held straight in a continuous line, which is better; or place a small piece of straw over that spot, as we have said for the finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your restoration and nearby, the condition of an abscess caused by a hot application - during your operation - against what you guide when any cause of those occurs, according to what is repeated about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Regarding the restoration of fractures in the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone, worn out and broken, is felt to be converted into the part in front and above the knee.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done so that the muscle is strengthened over the fracture and other muscles below the fracture, and the patient lies on their belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And have the surgeon extend all the muscles to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it approaches the size of the thigh bone, then have the muscle approach to the back of the part of the femur, so that the extension reaches its length and the other muscles below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is near the knee, then make the muscle come to the back of the knee and let the extension be towards the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And have the doctor adjust the bone on both sides of their hands so that you reduce it according to natural similarity and the bones are joined for good connection; then guide that you place a plaster and a bandage if there does not occur any abscess in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it occurs abscess in it, then you let that rest for a few days until the abscess caused by heat disappears, and have you return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage for it is done like this: guide that you envelop over the fracture a hard cloth, fold that two or three times, and remove any excess from it; then guide to envelop the part until it reaches the knee and the thigh bone.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the thigh and the area near the knee on the parts below, let the ends of the needle reach from the part behind to both sides, then guide to rotate around the area and thigh bone any excess from the cloth.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And have placed on the thigh at that fracture spot straw, and place another piece of straw over the bone in the area where the part is.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And have filled the gaps between the thigh and the knee with many cloths, so that the bandage can be clotted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And have begun with a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four coverings, and as you get further from the site of the fracture, your bandage should be smaller and more gentle and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend the ends of the needle to the parts below until it reaches the chest cavity, and strengthen both ends of the straw from the other part so that the muscle is not pulled out of its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And carefully massage the structure over that area, so that no injury occurs to the member, neither a cauterization nor pus formation, nor swelling; and if any cause of those happens, then prepare yourself for the patient's fainting, and correct whatever is happening nearby according to what we have discussed.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is a piece of bone in the mouth which can be placed, then carefully dig out such that you equalize it according to your ability; and if not, do so on him and keep touching it, and treat whatever precedes the remembrance within until he is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some discussions suggest that this break in the foot is strong like this other bone adjustment to your stars, as we said about the assistant and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of this manner to the patient, no limpness occurs to the sick person; and if it is restored alone, otherwise than what is applied to his other side, then it is necessary that he limps for as long as it lasts.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the foot is strong for about 10 days or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the break in the knee joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	And know that the break in the knee joint is somewhat awkward to correct, but it usually causes visible deformities.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if it happens to him that there is a break, then it is merely a crack or strain in his parts, and this is either an inconvenience or many inconveniences, and everything on this is based on the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of this is such that what is broken in his parts should be equalized among these, and then added and connected as far as possible according to the principle of harmony, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and press over that round star, if you need it from that; and strengthen above with the ligature according to what is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other breaks, such as cauterization and pus formation similar to those until everything that is convenient opposes any accident while he is healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the break in the shoulder joint.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	And know that in the shoulder joint there are two bones, one of which is thick and called by the name of the shoulder; and the other is delicate and is called easy.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to certain types of break which happen to both bones in the arm, and that is how he undergoes restoration like restoring the arm equally, and the operation for this is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are fractured at once, the shoulder joint becomes affected in all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if only the delicate bone is broken, the shoulder joint affects the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if only the thick bone is broken, you'll find it in that place, and those are causes not within your consideration.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the tendons according to that equalization.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the break in the shoulder joint is distant and without visible symptoms, let the extension be gentle and favor your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the shoulder joint there is an operation reason on the arm, which happens when you equalize your stars and complete all of your operation. In that case, you will take weights from the thigh bone, which are placed under the reasons that are paused on solid ground, and they are made from palm branches; remove those to which slight roughness applies, and do not use heavy hands, and have their length according to the length of the shoulder joint, and within the break for the arm.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop each area with two layers according to the length of the body, placing one over the shoulder joint on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be within the break inside the chest in a suitable location.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And align the two stars at three points of both extremities and at the middle point; for this structure is prohibited from bending towards the right or left part, it stays in good station.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And once a braid of string has been applied according to the length of the curvature; then place the curvature under it so that it retains its original movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mostly make sure you do this in a fracture, and when you have that specific injury.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider for each day the curvature and study it thoroughly from later on, and protect it from pus or swelling or other similar causes; and when any cause of those occurs, then apply to it what prevents it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Regarding the fracture of the heel and bones of the foot, as well as the fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the heel it does not occur to have a complete fracture; but in relation to the bones of the foot, there are some occurrences of fractures; and with respect to the fingers of the hand, few fractures occur, and they do not happen among them unless during the months when they are ready.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot, and sometimes those bones are lifted above each other, then the patient should place their foot on a prepared ground like this, as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And place one foot on that which is elevated from those bones, and press the others, and apply pressure evenly among them until they return to their original positions.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply plaster and cover it up, and place the patient's chest on a small table with two cushioned seats.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that part of the leg in relation to its natural descent; because you have enveloped that with cloths and other remedies.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as three or four days pass for the patient, then you loosen the bandage, which you will find with bones evenly set, or if they are swollen or dislocated, and the operation is done in that manner just as you would know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If some fingers are swollen, then restore those, and place them evenly as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place a splint on the swollen finger according to its length, and add just a little padding under it; then have the patient lie on this table as recommended to you, and strengthen that part in relation to its natural descent.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is swollen is from the bones of two, three or more fingers, then place on each finger a splint wrapped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the chest, and while standing on one of the cushions under the table have the patient's chest so that it has good support.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes, as we have mentioned in other fractures of accidents we've discussed; apply this principle to every situation where it applies.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Regarding the fracture of the thigh bone and the bones of the knee, as well as the knee joint of the body.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is swollen, then make that settle into a downward position, and incline it slightly towards the right part, and have it held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife places her hand on the knee bone, and has it placed in the knee bone as she desires; and have the woman bent down, and lift each of her child's arms gradually. All this is done so that it faces forward towards the front part of the thigh as desired and the swollen bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, help her lift up the knee so that it can be done easily, and allow her to urinate. Then return that according to the method in which you have mixed it at the beginning, and return to her first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or roughly around those, until that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an oyster shell and place over her thigh one of the hollows of the stomach; then immerse the entire bladder in her thigh, and blow into the tube with force so that the bladder is inflated inside the thigh, where the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then fill it with the knee and stay like this for as many days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the knee bone of a man or woman is swollen, then administer in its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended about the thigh bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is straight does not get hidden in these nearby fractures that seldom occur, especially when it comes to one with some study and understanding of this my free advice; for that fracture means to you in the major ways of mechanical direction in its restoration and adjustment, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And in the knee of a man when it is swollen, take guard of it with a poultice, and place the knee in that; then cover him/her with a bundle of cloth, have it wrapped, and leave him/her for three days or roughly around those, until he/she is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Regarding the restoration of fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient in the case where you suffer from a fracture that is infected, especially if the bone is large such as the bone of the knee or elbow, or similar to those, then you should take care and use bloodletting on it immediately if your conditions for bloodletting are met or can be justified as we have previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound discharges pus, then take care to retain as much of it as possible that you dust over it with powder you mix with water, unless there is another cause not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And start to restore the fracture on that specific day, and do not prolong this treatment, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	May it occur that an abscess forms, then let the restoration of your patient happen within the 7th day, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach this for a total of 4 days, where you will cause unnecessary mishaps.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	May it happen that the broken bone is protruding over the uncovered wound, then take care to reduce and equalize that with your hands in facilitating and achieving a minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May it happen that extension is not in your preparation and equalizing you with your hands, then reduce that with your hands using this tool; and this tool is made of iron, its length being 7 or 8 dits long or according to the size of the wound; and for this, a doctor must have three or four depending on how much this suits in the treatment for all types of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it's soft and also in that little coarseness for fear that it might bend, you should compress on it during the operation time.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And if it has an acute end with a margin on its ends; and the top of it is coarsely tensed, and inside the patient towards the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how it is in the patient:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It's named in Greek as "volentz atelarem" which translates to a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that you ensure the end of your patient is raised above the protruding part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that in a groove until the bone returns and is equalized with any equilibrium.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them. If the broken end is subtle and does not take that tool well for access, then you should insert the end of that bone into a place where the instrument has power over this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	May it happen that you cannot reduce the bone to this extent as we have suggested, then cut that according to what is suitable for your scissors which we have mentioned; or cut that with one of the saws in any manner possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And carefully remove that which remains on the surface of the bone that is rough and thin.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and during this reduction, the patient feels intense pain, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place. And then give your patient a good rest.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration to the bone is completed, then immerse a cloth in a black stoptic wine, especially if it's summer, and do not apply ointment or any other substance on the wound that might cause infection and erosion.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And after your completion of the restoration of the bone, administer ointments during that time, and leave the wound uncovered so that you cut it with a scalpel and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful to not let the wound touch the fracture, as cuts made this way by doctors often cause death or paralysis or severe pain in their patients, that is health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your wound is slight, soft, different from the stiffness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those other bad accidents that we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that spot, then do not assume to apply bandages there, but instead cover that with hard cloth instead of bandages, supporting your patient at that point.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about one or two days have passed and the wound begins to heal, let there be a bed for your patient under that cloth you laid on it with oil, and then administer calks, ointments according to our usual practice which medicate wounds, thus like tetrastarch and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is important for you to loosen the bandage and assess the wound every morning and evening until it consolidates and heals, and so that the infection runs from your patient towards the parts left with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes several days and is not consolidated or detached from your patient's bed, then you should know that here are small delays due to which you need to examine the wound with care.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those delays that are separated and are removed, those that do not separate and cause the member to suffer pain, strive to cut those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound turns green or blackens, it's stenophthalamia or another kind of corruption and decomposition, then you should stop applying each one according to what is suitable for your treatment as there is a detailed explanation in its chapter regarding this.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in the case where you need to use good judgment and prepare your presentation: when the bone is large and broken, elevate it like the bone of the thigh and auxiliary ones and similarly as those of large limbs, and do not presume to injure him, nor the removal that cuts lead to death; leave it there until it can settle in, which will fall down by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then cure the wound if you see it, and if not leave that alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation that occurs in the aftermath of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Dislocations occur in this dislocation during the healing of a fracture, especially close to joints, and is stretched by the figure of the limb; and strongly prohibit movement of its normal operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the dislocation is recent and administer medicines that have a stopping effect such as those of aloes, onions, garlic, vinegar, and similar; you may take some or all of these, and confirm whether they are effective in stopping pain, or if they reduce inflammation, or improve circulation, and place these over the dislocation covered by cloth, and ensure good compression on it.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the compression in place for several days without removing it; then remove it and replace another one until the dislocation is healed. Or apply a lead plate on top of that layer, as lead has the property to reduce whatever is inflamed in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the dislocation has hardened and cannot be reduced naturally, then you need to make a small incision, and cut it along the upper part of the swelling, or remove the excess and prominent parts. Or apply some remedies inside until it is healed; then treat it while it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Regarding the restoration of fractures when it is restored, and then allow that to happen according to the nature of each limb.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then you have to do this with the slight and flexible limbs, not according to their nature: from which there are several causes of disease. One is an excess of fluid in the muscles and the connection of what was done wrong; or by excess constriction of the muscles where nutrition can't reach the limb; or by excess grease causing inflammation; or by unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to weakness of the blood within the patient's body and due to debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of this is to give strength to the patient and make the body of the limb tender where the blood multiplies within it; and apply baths; and insert oil and joy on it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place honey on the limb, in order that the honey attracts its nutrition, or continue with the application of the oil mixed with hot water, so that nutrition can flow and return to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the treatment of fractured bones that are bent or twisted, and prohibit their natural operation when it comes to them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens that the limb has been restored and there is a deformity or prominence in the fractured bone and dislocation, thus changing the shape of the limb, however, the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, so you should accept the word of the one who believes that this limb was newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Justly so are there many doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very reprehensible causing great fear in the sign of which it leads to death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If there is weakness and dislocation are recent, then it must be treated with water containing herbs that soften, such as hellebore leaves and root extracts, and milkvetches, and similar; this should be applied to the plaster of a softening mixture like that used with colic. Or if it's taken from raw gelatine of hellebore and is cooled in gauze or with oil from cumin, then it should be applied covered with that one. Or if it's taken from fat fruits and strung with string made of silk, and similar; this must also be treated using medicines known as consolidating agents.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by repeated light rubbing while wet, and should be administered by moving the limb throughout its entire body at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has already been there and was forced and hardened to become stiff, requiring treatment with iron, then you must dissolve what's above it and allow continuous bone to be dissolved, and cut off that excess from dislocation of that part in the bone using fine incisions, and should facilitate this treatment by diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Regarding speaking on dislocations.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any joint in its place, so it is forbidden to move, and it distorts the shape of the limb, causing great pain and serious injuries on the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when it happens with a dislocation, you must immediately puncture to reduce it, and not delay in reducing it, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and strongly resists the reduction of dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this purpose it should neither be too hot nor too cold during the inflammation phase, as several causes lead to convulsions and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	And when this happens, it must be treated with the mustard poultice of the patient, and then left for it to rest in the abscess; and the limb should be covered with warm water and oil, and immediately reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire limb is treated with that which will recall its memory to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already organized the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the body part pus goes inside to the other part, leaving it.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, you leave it.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So, when the two jaws are dislocated and they do not touch; and the dislocation of both is done according to two ways: that either are slightly moved from their places by a little movement, and become somewhat soft; or are completely dislocated and completed, within which they make saliva come out of the patient's mouth and cannot have that nor can close their mouth, and the tongue of the patient is enveloped in its own saliva.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, then in the larger positions it returns by itself due to a small cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and full, then it must be that a gentle reduction of him be administered, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister must have the head of the patient, and let the doctor place his one hand on the point of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is from one side; or insert both his hands at once, if the dislocation is from both sides, and the rest of the commands for the patient's hands are outside among which equalize; and command the patient to stop moving his jaws and let those move in any direction; and the doctor makes the jaw equal and thrusts the jaw back into its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of him is difficult, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, within which a slight reduction of both takes place and does not delay the complete reduction of both, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and it is not softened, then place on those powders of drap in cerot, and make them with wax and oil rubbed; and let them be done in favor of softening.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, his head between two pillows, so that he does not hurt either to the right or left side; and do not force him to have any cause by force; have his food be forbidden meat, within which when the pains are softened and the jaws are closed, then let him have whatever he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered in ease, and do not work on the edge of the mouth with eating, drinking, or blowing, within which the jaw is closed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated in any hour and do not convert to their places, then mild fevers and frequent soda occur, and it becomes very clear that the patient's stomach has become inflamed, and it becomes very clear and experiences cholera vomiting.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, then know it is loss; and mild fevers will kill the one to whom this happens within three days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of dislocation of the sternum and extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not dislocated inside the chest by its continuity with the ribs; and sometimes it becomes dislocated outside of the part, which is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And press the place with your hand with strong pressure, so it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And press that area with plaster and powder, strengthening it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	And the extremity of that which is in contact with him does not become dislocated at all; so it must be reduced and equalized according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And press that area with plaster and powder, and tourniquet, and command the patient to rest and have peace until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this treatment of healing, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the part of the nipple to the other side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it becomes dislocated at the top of the muscle, which happens suddenly; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is especially dislocated and situated outside on the sides of the parts opposite to the nipple, and especially in those where there are few muscles, slightly dislocated; but in those with large muscles, it is located outside with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to some people with a blow or impact, and the muscle of him is puffed up from the pus pocket, and becomes dislocated by this already being dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, if you experience this while you are overburdened with him, then proceed in the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And when you know the dislocation of him which is at the sides opposite to the nipple; then distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact muscle, which you find among those obvious differences; and find in the head of the muscle a concavity and opposite to the nipple of the muscle as one year, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his elbow, nor even that by all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should move or align it, and then you easily find it by palpation, not hiding it.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a slight reduction is performed when it is cold and the patient is in pain.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction for you is that the minister raises your hand to his parts above; then he holds your feet near you so, and lifts your joint with strength in its own place. The minister raises your hand, extends it there; then he pauses it near you so, causing it to return slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if it is not returning because of what we have said, which involves the cause that occurs in dislocation, for a few days, then prepare that the patient be bathed in hot water and be administered a salve that soothes and calms him so as if he were made from high-quality wool, fenugreek, and dill in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then have the patient lay on their back and place your hands under them while waiting for wool that is equal between lightness and tightness. And then the doctor places his arm over the lump, raises the muscle's head with strength, and pulls the hand of the patient so it doesn't get stuck in the parts below; another minister holds the head of the patient, making sure it doesn't get stuck in the parts below, until that returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that second in this manner: and make it so there is a man present who is longer than the patient, standing on his side next to him, inserting his muscle under the patient's feet while elevating the patient's feet towards the parts above where the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the parts below his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is slight, then it's covered that another cause might be suspended by him, since due to his seriousness that dislocation returns immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And when it is reduced gently in this other manner: and place on the ground a long stick with its head rounded in shape, like a mortar's handle, which should neither be thick nor thin, then have you place the patient under it; as they lay on the head of the stick covered with linen, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and have their hand extended towards the parts below the other side; and extend your body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if reducing you is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this treatment: and take a stick whose length is equivalent to two arm lengths, its width should be four fingers wide, and its thickness should taper at the tip according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place linen rags on the rounded head so that the stick does not crush the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then have the patient place their feet under them, and extend their hands or arms over the stick between the parts below, and hold the stick on the support and the arm, and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And have the arm placed on a ladder according to its width, and the hand extended towards the parts below. The other body should be suspended from the other side, so that the joint returns immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of you is completed according to any method possible, then cover that you place under a wool cushion of equal quantity; and then place prepared plaster with powder of moly root and egg yolk on the entire muscle area, so it is mixed above. And then strengthen your hand at the tightness area decently. Then roll out the plaster, and the hand of you should be connected to your neck, and left alone, without causing any strain to your hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it's covered that the food of the patient should be light during which time the member is comforted, as this is more favorable to their recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more to seven or five times and exercise is done. And so if it's closed and not softened, then it's already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated due to several days of moisture that affects it or by another cause, then it's covered that in that case, cauterization should be administered on three wounds, as mentioned in the section about cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are released, but the plaster and tightness are reduced on several wounds without being closed, and they cannot lift that arm towards the parts above, then you should know that your nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will not be fixed in its place for any amount of time.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of that which is caused by lifting or the breasts or parts behind, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension towards the chest, so that it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And administration of the other tightness should be done, and treat that until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing is greatly delayed in the limb and late with the movement of it, then the patient uses baths for several days until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment for dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it has been dislocated in all directions, but mainly towards the front and back. The dislocation is not hidden when you feel it moving or touch it according to its specific position once dislocated. And when adjusting the dislocated shoulder, it clearly shows that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch it with its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And know that it's the shoulder bones; reduce the dislocation immediately before reaching its synovial pouch. If it reaches its synovial pouch, reducing it becomes difficult, and your healing is not complete; especially when it's in the back areas, which are worse than all other types of dislocation, causing intense pain, and wounds often result from that leading to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, which is possible to reduce, is when your hand is extended between two breasts, and your arm is outstretched, and the doctor's hands are on the shoulder and under you, and he pushes the joint with the heels of his hands or against the base of his palm, where it turns back into its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns in this way by bending your hand against your hand, hitting the shoulder with the base of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and forceful movements.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants should extend the arms, and have this understanding with two assistants to prevent any resistance during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm in all directions, as it is enveloped by a folded long cloth around your hand, or tightly.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply oil to that for it helps in causing those factors which assist in the smoothness of the joint and facilitates it; then he pushes the joint vigorously until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction of it is that it should be placed on that soft bed where there is a stiffness and movement of fat in goose oil, and it should be stretched with a tight bandage; the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release the bandage around it and leave that area.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then you repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it is tightened; then release that area.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if it happens that the gravity interferes with reducing the joint, and your position is in motion, then you apply moistening in bath and subtle friction, or compression, while it's being lubricated; or you place a smear of moving grass oil on the joint, on its soft skin; then bind it, and leave it over the bone during the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then hold that position, and place your shoulder in the bath; when it gets wet, then you rub the joint with a mild friction, and then apply it repeatedly on that area using a smear of moving oil, one time, and then the second, and the third time,.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread within the abdomen, into its limits.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place yourself on that wet and scraped cow's opening with strength on it; do this several times while it is still wet, until it returns to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation in the forearm, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes part of the hand is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. However, for other joints, it's different; yet it needs to be quickly reduced at the moment of dislocation before stopping or if there is a cauterization in that area.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the forearm on a table and have one assistant extend the arm of the patient. The doctor places his hand or palm against the edge of the joint, pushing it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Yet it needs to be considered if the palm has already reached into the arm, then the patient should place his two hands on a table with extension and reduction; and if dislocation occurred beforehand, then the position of the hand is inherently over the table, so that the doctor's hand rests against that edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, it's good; and otherwise, apply it with wet plaster on the cauterization site and leave that area. Don't repeat this process though, for if you don't, you won't endure nor can you proceed with reducing it as time passes, which is bad.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Yet the joint is determined according to its curvature; and don't expect any cause from the patient other than that the arm has been softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are injured or torn, and thus there's no work for it but to be strengthened with cauterization nearby and apply force accordingly due to this cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the badness has returned, then place on their dressing which we have re-created, and let it be laid out and strengthened for three days; and afterwards let it be removed and let it be laid out again and work your hands on it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient's movement has persisted and has caused him any degree of gravity, then apply this with water jet and some frictional movements, during which it will be relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some movements can dislocate the fingers in all directions.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one or more fingers are dislocated towards the two sides of the palm or towards the belly of the hand, then stabilize the finger and push back the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And hold the tip of the finger in place, suspend that part towards where it is dislocated, and leave that there for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And lift that up and extend that until its strength matches in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the night comes, repeat it according to that instruction, and do not stop removing it throughout the day and exercising with movements, and lay it at night; and do this for a few days until it strengthens.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make a similar thing if it is dislocated towards the belly of the hand, and lay it there and do this as your first operation until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated to other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulders.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to one of the shoulders or collarbone causing a complete dislocation, and if you reinforce them with straps at those places, then in that case there is no cure, for death follows the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the elimination from the patient goes beyond his will and he cannot hold it; and some movements can soften certain parts or two sides or arms of him, or one of those; or you reinforce a shoulder at its place, and with movements you soften and movements are done to move those towards four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that has already been moved to the behind parts and it is called hyperextension.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of the patient is that then you consider whether hyperextension occurs during childhood, for in that case there is neither cure nor healing of it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In cases where it occurs due to impact or by force or in similar ways, the ancients would have said that their treatment methods were lengthy, from which only profit is gained; I have already abbreviated this according to what one of them considers excessive in detail, given my proximity to a middle exposition on the subject, for which I have done this and elaborated it using various tools from which I will show this and expand on this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in hyperextension that occurs at the front of the legs, there is neither cure nor healing for it; and similarly when it is done to both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And for those, only that which occurs in the two properly at what I have recommended is cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient be laid on his face over the pillow in such a way that it is close to the wall, and have his legs stretched out in order that his feet do not touch the floor.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And have a straight stick placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the pillow around the head of him, and another stick near his feet at the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And let the attendant hold the stick, and do not make it fixed in a hole; and another attendant holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the patient and leave him the lion's mane fastened; and extend the end of the mane to the stick which is supposed to be under his head, and lay it there; and strengthen the other band on the buttocks and knees of him, and place them under his chest; and adjust all the bands and lay those in the other stick that should be under his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And let the attendant extend the band to the part of the stick at that point, and do not reinforce both sticks and the bands at their places where they are fixed, but rather not as tightly as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the shoulder blade with strength until it returns, or places one table there and let him adjust his feet to that table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three arms' lengths, and dig into the wall as we said was close to the patient at a place between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the top of the table on the shoulder blade, the doctor puts his feet on the other end, and stretches there until the shoulder blade is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open up the arm that is turned inside the body; and let you place under ground the head of the patient at the back of the pillow with two sticks, whose length is one arm, and place his head at the back of the pillow in exactly the same way with two sticks; and let the distance between each stick be a hand's width, and it has been done in every stick to pull that turn around, and each is firmly placed under ground so as not to move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make a small incision where it hurts, and turn it in both directions on each of the two bars.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of him is a bar in which the rod is formed, whose length is one palm where it is turned; and on the other two rods there is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And reinforce the bands you tightened on his feet in the bar that is placed at the head of him, and the bands you tightened on his thighs in the turn which should be under his shoulders.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And make each joint lie with one minister who twists the turn at his hand, and the doctor equalizes the spondylus according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how it should be done for the twist:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And once the spondylus has been returned and the area has been equalized, then cover it with a poultice of dried material mixed with pork fat, and seal; then place on the poultice until the surface reaches the width of three fingers or roughly that amount, and the length be whatever takes up the area of yellowness, and over the part of the spondylus.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And place on it the band we said, and use the patient to nourish with subtle matter so that he may heal.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any lingering concern in the area at the end of the healing, then cover with medications that soften and cleanse during the period after the table has been administered for a long time, which we have recommended; and it has already been administered in that area with a sheet of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes there are lingering concerns at the end of the spondylus of each side, and it is pained by that dislocation; and this is the bone which has already weakened so much that it should not be assumed that you will incur death from this medicine, for it will make you suffer death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol thirty-one.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Regarding the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not deserve mere dislocation only, and does not happen to them what happens to other joints with little movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways, which are dislocated to parts inside, or to parts outside, or to parts frontward, or to parts backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mostly dislocated towards the inside parts, and less towards the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And a sign of the dislocation towards the inside parts is that when you adjust the healthy ankle to the foot, it becomes longer and the heel is more prominently than the healthy one, the foot cannot bend at its ankle and should be bent backwards by so much that the knee cap has already penetrated here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of what happens in terms of dislocation is towards the outside parts, it is that his accidents are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of what happens in terms of dislocation towards the front is that the swelling of his leg expands according to the fullness, however it does not bend at the ankle where there is pain and if it is pushed forward it cannot go beyond that towards the front; and his urine is retained and his gait is restricted, you should walk him on his toes.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of what happens in terms of dislocation towards the back is that it does not expand the heel, nor can it bend forward where bending would make him nauseous, and his leg is shorter than the other one, his gait is softened, and the knee cap should be at this point.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The proper reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider them, then if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already happened to those around you, so with his disposition you administer reduction to him and according to the way he should be; and thus there should not be any assumption in that particular treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you take care to return the joint and extend that towards inside parts and outside parts, and make her bend to the right and left, which will make him return and there is no need for other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	And if it does not return in this manner, then prepare strong ministers and extend his leg from the part further down, or on his thighs, or with a band that is applied over the swelling above the heel; and another minister extends his hand above him so that his knees touch his feet. And strengthen with the bandage around the knee area, and have another minister hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And extend his leg or from inside parts to the pain in the part of the cleft, or from back parts to the parts on each side.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let this extension of all be done in one go where the foot is raised to his chest on the ground and hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we said, it's good; and otherwise, then for all four types, this requires its own treatment according to its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In his own reduction, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inside parts, you should have him bend his leg towards his buttock; then place the bands on the knee area in that spot which is between the head of his thigh bone and the spot where he should bend backwards. And extend the band further down from the part of the pain to the other cleft side.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes hold of the patient's arms, and hardens the fatty area on the lower thigh cushion, and extends all parts outward by vigorous extension, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is for a minor surgery on the member in which this part is reduced compared to other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you excuse yourself and do not follow this method of treatment, then insist that both the patient's feet are placed at the same time, gently, lightly, on both the legs and both the heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And for each of them, measure the length according to four fingers, and make the patient's leg longer than the other by two more fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then have the leg lifted above the head, and let it be in the air; and the length of the leg from the ground is four arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young person to lift the foot of the bed, and have it suspended with the leg of another young person, and the other young person decreases the leg with extreme strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation outwardly, it's important that the patient bends over a table as we have recommended during our wax baths; and reinforce the muscle on the inner leg appropriately and on its feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And have two beds laid out, one under the patient's foot and the other at their head; and lay out two beds adjusted to the middle of the buttocks on which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the leg is not dampened by the bed being between the thighs of the patient, because you must allow for extension in all parts without it being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends according to their part, and the doctor holds the reduction with his hand as per the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So if you follow this reversal well, it will be very beneficial; and otherwise, pause carefully on that as we have mentioned during our wax baths regarding that alignment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And you should have the leg resting gently on its knees quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in front of the parts, then you should have the leg extended lightly, and as per this half description on the bed; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand under the loin, and gently forces it with his other hand, and with that force pauses that extension to all parts except for the part behind.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the parts behind, then you should not have the leg extended towards those parts, but lifted above the ground; and you should have it paused on a hard surface, as you would for the sitting position if its width is dislocated outwardly, as we mentioned about his lying over two widths; and it's above her face and muscles are stretched out, as we said, almost completely.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And you should have compression administered on the table over the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is completed according to this - and you can't hide the signal of the patient's reduction, which means that you should extend the leg twice, and when you make those equalities and let the leg stretch its muscle and expand his discomfort, then you know that the limb has been returned as per your actions - and then you adjust two thighs, apply plaster, and stretch in this way so that no width is lost in any of the parts; and keep the leg at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the bandage and plaster, and compare one thigh with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And when you see those equalities in view, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and hence allow the leg to move.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and plaster that area again, stretch it according to your first stretching, and allow it to rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, have the patient walk around with support for a few days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capítulo XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the thigh.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thigh can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outwardly, inwardly, or the parts on the outside are more dislocated than those on the inside; and the parts facing forward do not get dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the signal for a dislocation of the thigh is that you command the leg to apply its muscle on the knee; then you know that the thigh is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you straighten the leg outwards, so that it already extends its muscle if possible; apply your two hands to his face and pause his foot between your feet; then make the thigh stick to your palms, hold those together with force on the dislocated part of his thigh while another minister stretches his foot in order for the dislocated part to return to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the signal of restoration is that its muscle sticks to the knee at rest without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply plaster to it and have the muscle stick to the knee, and then keep those in one position for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient for walking for a few days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of you is justified for me, then administer a strong extension from those willow branches which have been previously mentioned in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol. xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the humerus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The humerus is sometimes dislocated due to small displacements, and at other times it is dislocated according to the complementarity of its parts, and your dislocation can be caused either internally or externally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of your humerus dislocation is that you feel it swollen moving towards the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for your displacement should be gentle and easy on the hands, and it must be equal until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When treating your displacement according to complementarity, you should have the patient stand straight and place a strong and brave servant behind them, at the middle point of their back.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And place your right hand on the top of their head and your left hand at the bottom part of the body near the pit area.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the body towards you with your right hand, and place your left hand twice on it, and extend your left. And push the bottom of the body with your right hand where the knee is supposed to be.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do these two movements as we have discussed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And push the bottom of the body towards the back at this third movement, and you are at the pit area.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two movements according to this manner, and if you find the body equal, it's good; and otherwise, then with this method operate again until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are unable to reduce it using the method we've discussed, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, strengthen a firm mat under the ground, place it between your legs, and already wrap a cloth around them to prevent the body from moving.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the servant of your body holds their legs, and another servant extends the body with their hands or under the willow that lies on top of the chest; and extend each servant against the extension of their pair, and the mat is present between the thighs of the patient holding them, so that the body of you is not pulled towards the parts behind its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor equalizes the displacement with their hands, and another servant holds the healthy leg at the parts behind, where the displacement returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And once the displacement returns and you are informed of your recovery from this treatment, then stop with the plaster and strengthen that firmly, and place the body against the back.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And when you fear or protect from the nerves that are behind over the humerus, to ensure the muscle there is not overly vigorous and does not harm it heavily.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And after two or three days, let that rest; and if the muscle has softened, strengthen that again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And after one more day or four, start to move the patient without assistance for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is necessary to go ahead of that space, then don't do it until you are sure the displacement has not dissolved and corrupted elsewhere, and do nothing without treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you happen to have pus come out, then know that you should administer in the recovery of your what we previously mentioned in our account, at another place for treatment and medication until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol. xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Ensure that the one which is dislocated returns to a slight extension of three fingers; and what is not difficult, before it becomes easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in some bones of the sole of the foot, then know that you should have the patient stand with their heel on a spot equal to the ground or on a table, and let them stand as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And step up on your foot, place your heel on what you intend for the joints, and have someone step with their foot against yours against its height so that it returns. And watch as it is equalized and does not appear at the location of the joint.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And place your foot of the patient under a table that takes up the entire foot, with two heads, and strengthen it against three days of stiffness and firmness; then let him step off for several days until he is strengthened and movement can be assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol. xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Regarding the different types of dislocations that may occur from a wound, fracture, or at any time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When some cause of those happens, and you dedicate yourself to the treatment of that and restoring them, multiple attempts often lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore do not presume on the treatment of your, but rather one who is skilled in the art, long used, merciful and compassionate; he should be patient, not hasty nor presumptuous, using medicine that allows pus to come out only as necessary, and leave the patient to divine judgment, not for the sake of alleviating distress, which may show some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then it strives to quickly make the reduction in the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an abscess from the cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we wish, then administer treatment which allows for an abscess from the cautery and cares for the wound according to what you deem suitable with these dry salves.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is akin to fracture and occurs in the separate bones of the skull, then you should perform their articulation, and do as we have said in the simple ailments pertaining to this, as described in those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And follow and avoid according to your wisdom that within the treatise in the paths of fear as you are preceded by my preaching; for this is better to you from which you owe your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more health for those who see it in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	And thus conclude the words of Al-Bucasis perfectly from which God may be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
