Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Albucasim begins his words.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, I fulfill this treatise for you, which is the last part of the science of medicine. For its completion and because it is written by him, and due to its explanations and declarations, in my opinion, I complete that which I owe to you in this work, which is a segment of action on me, or surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation on oneself is confined in our region and in our times to being private, where there is great risk to the science of it, and its traces remain. There would be no knowledge of it except for a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which correct many errors and misconceptions about it, since they are closed to understanding and extend the difficulty of doing it and the art itself.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive this order of the treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and for it to come with the forms of the tools of cauterization and other instruments of work such as an addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why it's hard to find a good surgeon on his own hand in our time is that the art of medicine is extensive. It requires being familiar with anatomy, as described by Galen, understanding the joints and their connection and separation; knowledge about bones, nerves, and muscles, including their number and how they are connected; and familiarity with pulsating and stationary veins, and where they exit from.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And that's why it was said by Hippocrates that in his name is the motion, but more so in his work and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already mentioned this in the introduction of this treatise; whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy will fall into error which could lead to the death of men, as I have seen too many cases like that. Some are formed in this science and abandon it for another science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I have seen a skilled doctor who accidentally caused a scrophulous abscess in the neck of a woman. He incised some arteries of the neck, resulting in great bleeding that led to her death among his patients.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who was almost to execute an operation on a man who had become emaciated in his condition. The tumor was large and spread to him, and he removed the tumor with a piece of bladder tissue. As a result, that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I already attempted to remove it, and saw that due to the size of the tumor and the position of the patient underneath him, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another doctor who received payment from the Duke of our land for surgery, and operated on a black soldier whose leg was broken; in his lack of knowledge, he removed the fracture, covering the wound with bandages and stitches of strong thread, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he then began to heal according to his wishes, he then bandaged, and after some days of rest as I instructed you to remove the bandage; and this happens when the leg and foot are infected with pus, it leads to loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I had already been asked by him, and prepared to remove the bandage, resulting in peace and alleviation of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was confirmed in the member, so I could not stop it, and it did not cease to spread the corruption within the body of the patient.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who perforated an abscess and became inflamed several days later, causing great suffering to his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is because the cancerous cauterization is pure of melancholic humor, so it doesn't spread to every part, but only affects a member that suffers from being exposed to everything.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on oneself be divided into two aspects: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is work in which there are great dangers.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already discussed this in all parts of this treatise where there are operations involving error and fear; so it is necessary for you to observe this and refrain from that, so that the pages do not slander or accuse you unjustly.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons for the duty and protection of God, and your patients for their happiness and strength.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by God's grace for health and peaceful succession, and leave your terrible diseases with difficult treatment, and keep your weapons of what makes you afraid, so that your rest is in your faith and your name does not abandon you: as more remain in your glory, better in this world and lastly to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen has already stated in some of his writings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Don't treat dangerous diseases with bad doctors, for it's better not to have a name than to have a bad doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have completed this treatise according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The treatise begins its division and starts with the first part of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered for operations within the feet, concerning the forms of instruments and tools of cautery, as well as what is necessary in the execution.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning drying and puncturing, as well as blisters, and arrow extracts, and the resemblance to those, all detailed and organized according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as treatment of twist and its resemblance to them; chapter ordered for operations within the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Regarding the cautery with fire and the application of acute medicine, as well as a memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	And thus begins the treatise on the entire body.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Let me tell you about the quality of the parts to be treated with cautery and their nodules, and at which stage it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the discussion about the quality of cautery's part and its nodules is long and tedious, subtle in science, and secretly concealed; much wisdom has already been spoken on this topic by many scholars, and they are in disagreement, so I'm afraid of lengthening this exposition.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And it is said that cautery affects the whole body universally in any matter or mixture of matters, except for two conditions, which are tail joints.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail and head areas where there is dry matter, it will desiccate; some argue that cautery is beneficial for those conditions, while others claim the opposite, stating that cautery is not suitable in maladies which are due to quality and dryness, since fire itself embodies quality and dryness, making it inappropriate for tail and head ailments where dryness should be cured by moisture.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And one who says the opposite argues that with cautery, joints are affected in all head and tail diseases that occur in human bodies. When you compare the body of a person to the state of moisture in its parts to the nature of fire, you find that the body is burned.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the argument of that person, whom I have experimented with for several times and discovered through experience.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not delve into the topic that has already been extensively discussed and practiced in the chapter of cautery exercises, nor have I explored the variety of human bodies or the disposition of illnesses within them, as well as their causes, incidents, and duration periods.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	And when it comes to other body parts, there should be no fear for you, especially in damp and wet diseases, which are already familiar to all doctors, they are not divided on this topic. Moreover, regarding the use of cautery in joints, they agree that it is not appropriate in those conditions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of treatment by cautery with fire and its goodness is about medicaments that burn; because fire itself is simple, its action affects only the member being treated and does not spread to other members except for slight harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of burning medicines reaches that part in the members to which they are applied, and it strongly encourages difficult healing in the diseased member and greatly hinders it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And fire, due to its simplicity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing other than spread excessively. We have come to know this through experiments and years of service studying the art in accordance with the truth about the causes; thus, I justify myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that such knowledge is not found freely accessible to you as a secret concealed by fire, along with the quality of its operation in human bodies and how it expels diseases through this operation, demonstrating a philosophical argument which would sharpen your understanding, I would have refrained from this exposition.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is best to perform cautery and prefer to do so in early spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at any time, because the harm due to accidental incidents is drowned in the swelling caused by the application of cautery, especially if it's for pain or necessary pains that are severe and cause bleeding; these do not tolerate delay as feared from those causing mischief, which is greater than slight harm entering through the seasons.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And don't let these thoughts concern you, or, children, what they underestimate is only the common people and the village doctors; it's that for the disease treated with cautery, not all times are suitable for recovery, so they take this as a consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not just because they are concerned about this; for cautery is nothing but a form of medicine that alters the body and dries out moist conditions which cause pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, excessive cautery exceeds medicine due to the value and effectiveness of its operation and the grandeur of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease might return at some point in time, depending on the nature of the body and the location of the disease, its effectiveness, as well as what accumulates within the body from superfluities, and what is consumed by it along with similar causes; unless the disease to which cautery has been applied is a subtle disease involving few superfluities and moist conditions, such as dental cautery for pain and its similarities; then, it's possible that the same pain might not return in the body, but this happens when done in small quantities.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	A common medical term is that cautery is the ultimate treatment method in medicine, which is an expert's discourse, not something I comprehend in it, since they believe it isn't a cure that enhances through medicine or any other cause leading to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The reason is opposite to that; and I understand that cautery is the ultimate treatment method in medicine only when treatments are administered for various illnesses, and those medicines don't cure, rather at the end of the cause they administer cautery, enhancing it towards that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from this one should know that cautery is the ultimate treatment method in medicine, not according to my understanding which understands common knowledge and many doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they would say that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they didn't say this simply because of the equality of gold and its inferiority to its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they would say that the place for cautery doesn't make a scar, as this isn't absolutely true, which I have already experimented and found that it doesn't do this in any body except these others; cautery with iron is good and better than with iron as they said. However, when you do cautery with fire using gold, you haven't been told about it, for its heat depends on the quantity you want according to the intensity of the gold, and what is prepared to receive friction; and if you adjust the fire over it, the gold melts in the fire, and in case in the fire a few sheets are formed so that the artisan can work with that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, when doing cautery with iron you should do it more lightly and more precisely according to the nature of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those of the section within the feet for whoever asks what they want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding cautery for pain in the head due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery allows the humidity and coldness to cause an unfortunate event of which there are two causes, one being the source of soda and muscle ache, called running, from the head towards the limbs and ear canals, as well as restlessness and tooth pain and throat ache, and universally for all illness caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and resembling those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows, which we first command the patient to be given liberating medicine to the head for three or four nights, according to what suits the patient and their age and their custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then instruct the patient to shave their head with a razor, and then have them sit on a lowered chair and place their head on their own seat.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand near to where his nose touches between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the midpoint where you pointed has been reached, apply the cautery olive to that spot, and heat it according to this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the heated spot as indicated, in such a way that your hand is slightly constrained as it descends, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see that some amount of the head is already exposed, like the size of a pea, then raise your hand. If not, turn your hand on that iron or another one, if it's cooled down, showing you what I've told you to do.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and let that rest for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over your burned wrist in the bowl, letting it rest until the crust caused by fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat the spot with an ointment from tetrapharmakon until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they would say that when the wound from a Roman has opened up, it heals better and more quickly, for which reason it is better and more rejuvenating.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they would say that the cavity is cauterized inside the ear, and that the cautery should be kept inside until a portion of the specificity of the ear becomes hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then let that part of the ear that is stuck to it heal.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they would say that when the cautery reaches the back end, it should push into the ear strongly until the ear falls outwards, and this is the form of applying olive-based cautery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that from that spot, the vapors of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is left open for a long time, then it should be treated until it becomes consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two kinds of cautery in detail, but rather in some people according to fear; then let that be left undone, you must know that it's better for health whenever possible; when the head is exposed by solution of continuity like we've testified in other body parts and especially when the head of the patient has a cool nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is more saving and you should use it better; from that one, do that work well for health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the topic of the head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged head pain occurs in the patient, and it is extended throughout their body, using head massages, ear treatments, capillary purges, bandages, gloves, lice combing, and scalp massage are advisable. Especially if a cautery has already been used with another type of cautery that counteracts the effects of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is strong in nature; and if it isn't excessively heated or exposed to great friction, this cautery will be different than others; he leaves one less for you.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And apply the cautery on the top of their head with an internal cautery where the scalp is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the scalp and expose the quantity we counted, then apply the cautery with an internal cautery behind the head in the area that is called a vein - it's the spot where suction is taken.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in such a way, do not expose the hole, because otherwise the patient experiences different intense pain when compared to other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I instruct you about this cautery in its place, that it has been said that this type of cautery is more subtle than the one used for head and occipital areas; this is how it works.
Capitol ters.	Final chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment of new migraines with cautery.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain occurs in the head region or is confined within it, it should be treated with medicinal preparations that lighten the head, and then administered with other treatments, which I have mentioned in the treatments of diseases; if nothing relieves the pain, then the cautery treatment consists of two methods: one using an acute burning medicine, or using iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The method of using a burning medicine for cautery involves taking one dollop of alcohol, and then applying it while pinching the extremities from both ears.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And apply the area of pain on the temple with a sharp knife, making sure to incise where there is already a spot exposed by the scalp, ensuring that it remains hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply strength on top of it by stopping descented compression, and let that area be free for the space of three hours; and afterwards clean off the alcohol, and let the wound heal over two or three days, and place your palm under water where the location feels warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment once it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see this, do as I have written about certain burning medicines in my detailed treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cautery using iron proceeds in this manner: with fire for the cautery, like this form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a lock of a key, where the head of the patient resembles a form of a rose, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And place your hand over the area of pain, and hold your hand back - so as not to burn the skin which has been exposed - and rotate the small iron piece slowly but quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that gets burned by the specificity of the scalp is such that it reaches most of it, lift your hand so that the artery which has been exposed does not get burned either, so as to prevent blood flow.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then dip your palm in salt water and place it on the area, let it rest for three days; and afterwards dip your hand in hot water, and after it is healed, treat it with ointment.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you notice this, perform the cautery at the end of the lancet as with cautery, and be careful not to incise the artery in this new type of migraine.
Capitol quart.	Final chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the treatment of old migraines with cautery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines as we have said in previous treatments and the divisions of diseases, and if those treatments do not relieve the patient, because their disease does not respond to what we have described for the first cautery using medicine or with fire; then understand that you should ignite the lancet cautery so that it becomes white, meaning place your hand over the area of pain along a line whose length is most of what we have described, or choose this method; and rest your hand for a moment and apply strength to that while incising the skin and going into the skull.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the mandible, which should not allow chewing, and that the tongue does not get burned as well as the nerves that control it, and that there be no muscle spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about guarding against the flow of blood from the artery which is cut, where there is fear in cutting, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not cautious; leave the operation to begin as usual with the patient.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come back to remind you of the regulation for blood flow accidents in case of burning the skin, according to your method, in this free location.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and when you find the pain tolerable in the patient's head, perform the cautery at the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said to use on the tip of the scab in an artery with a cautery having two blades. This is the better and more precise cautery treatment.
Capitol .v.	Head or brain area.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	关于耳痛的灼烧治疗。
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	当在耳中感到摩擦引起的疼痛，这是由于缺乏所致，并且与我之前描述的另一种治疗方法一起进行，在这种情况下没有加剧疼痛，那么使用灼烧治疗，这就是我所说的点状烫伤，这种疗法就是它的形状：
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	然后在灼烧点附近戳孔，让火焰遍及整个耳部，就像轮子被旋转一样，或者在任何时间的电路中，如果疼痛发生在任何位置。
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	逐渐地使用耳垂上的灼烧方法一点一点地，直到你找到疼痛的位置并尝试。
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	如果在整只耳垂上的灼烧点，如果在那里疼痛，然后就在那些位置上进行治疗直到它们愈合。
Capitol .vi.	头皮、头部或脑部区域。
De cauterizacio de turtura.	关于扭伤的灼烧治疗。
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	那种扭伤可以通过灼烧治疗来治愈，这种治疗方法并不是用那些通过淤血我们已经在论述病人疾病部分提到的特定种类。
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	避免使用针对干燥或神经痉挛而适用的灼烧治疗。
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	当你治疗那种由于关节炎、头痛和发热而引起的扭伤，如果治疗效果不佳时，那么在处理坏病时你应该用三次灼烧法：第一次是在耳垂上，第二个是在其热区域，第三次是连接两个唇部。
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	然后将您的灼烧器放在坏病的对面，只有在出现健康部分时才会看到缓解。
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	灼烧的形状是在耳垂的最尖端，比耳朵的顶部稍微高一点，在头部的角上，其长度按照所述部位的长度而定，在灼烧处放置您的手直到该部分被完全燃烧。
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	这就是灼烧的形状，是外科医生的特殊技艺，其形式在台面上展示出来。
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	然而，这种方法更加微妙，只需要少许；当你在多余粗糙的部位使用时，只需一点。
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	然后治疗该区域，在其前面进行处理直到它痊愈。
Capitol .vii.	头、头部或大脑区域。
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	关于古代中风的灼烧治疗。
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	当中风是旧病，并通过我们所说的治疗方法进行治疗但效果不佳，且患者没有发烧时，则用四次灼烧对它进行治疗：在头部的所有角上；以及在头部的中间位置（如之前所述）；并在喉咙处。
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	灼烧的方法是按照之前的说明进行操作。
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	已经对胃部进行了灼烧；并且在后面更多；然后用您正在处理的方法进行治疗。
Capitol .viii.	头部或大脑区域。
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	关于由淤血引起的健忘症的灼烧疗法。
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	确保给病人在早餐时提供大剂量的金银花和能清热解毒的丸剂。
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	然后刮去患者头部的所有部分，并在服用描述在敷料手册中中心描写的敷料时停止。
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	然后进行几次灼烧，这种就是灼伤的方式。
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	按照之前我说明的顺序做这些事情。
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	因此，如果这些疗法对他的健康有好处；否则，在他头部的最后部分对他进行三次灼烧，这些灼烧是从头部顶部的部分到颈部下面的部分。
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	在每次灼烧之间暂停大半的时间，然后用这种方式处理已经进行的灼烧。
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	如果您的身体能够承受疼痛，那么对您进行在中间部位的灼烧；如果感觉更强烈的疼痛，那么在两个角上进行灼烧。
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	然后在它痊愈时治疗它，并用橄榄油根据前面给出的形式进行涂抹。
Capitol .ix.	头部或大脑区域。
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	关于对全身的驱虫和缓和疼痛的灼烧治疗。
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	确保您在头部进行金银花和我们所说的药物处理；然后刮去患者的头，用灼烧在头部的中间位置对它进行治疗，并在头部的所有角上用灼烧，以及在身体最后部分用灼烧，在颈部椎骨处进行三次灼烧。
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	如果在许多疾病的缓和治疗中，病人能忍受疼痛并且疾病很严重，则用四次灼烧在两个椎骨上进行，并且在灼烧后将您的手放入火中，直到该部分被完全燃烧，然后移开您的手。
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	然后在它痊愈时处理它，并用橄榄油进行涂抹。
Capitol .x.	头部或大脑区域。
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	关于癫痫的灼烧治疗。
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	只有因淤血引起的癫痫才进行灼烧治疗，其他类型的癫痫则不适用此方法。
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	因此，确保在开始治疗时用金银花对他的大脑进行处理，并使用我们在描述中提到的另一种治疗方法，当病人体量较大且能承受药物的副作用时。
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then he administers gargles and mouthwash solutions, altering the diet for several days, with improvement of food digestion.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then cut the patient's head, and then apply a cautery at that spot in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery on the back of the head, and on each forehead bone he applies a cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates well, then apply the cauteries I've mentioned, with paralysis and body soothing over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use olive oil for the cautery as it has been described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the treatment of melancholy by cautery.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are dampness corrupting and weakness in the body, then apply the cauteries we have mentioned in the area for paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess reducing to melancholy, and the patient's body is damp, then make them drink what clarifies their brain according to what was previously described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then cut the patient's head, and then make a reasonable tortoise shape on it over the circle, and then return that area to the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is sixty years old, and has used all parts of their body.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place a liniment; it's worth using an old remedy from sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for a seasoned warmth measured by quantity, which the patient finds sufficient when it increases in them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that at the middle of the patient's head on the circle, let it cool in them until it is cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient throughout the week once, according to their other regimen of drinking until they are healed; or if you wish, apply this by making small punctures as much as possible, otherwise have your hand with a cautery in that orderly manner: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that cooked piece of meat in fat or in gray mutton grease.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the treatment of descending water by cautery.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is confirmed that the beginning of water has entered the chest due to the symptoms described in the division, then start and give the patient what clarifies their head, and keep him/her away from all dampness.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that sugar be dissolved in water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to raise their head, and apply a cautery on it in the middle of the head; and then apply two cauterizations in each temple if it is the beginning of the descent of water into both lungs, or one on either side if it is the beginning of water in one lung.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Apply the cauteries to all veins and arteries that are left from the chain; and place those cauteries in that line at the breadth of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And watch for any bleeding when it is being treated by cautery; and if you see that the patient's bleeding, hold back with some medicine which could be suitable to use.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come about knowledge regarding the extraction of arteries and the removal of those, as well as caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some times it is treated by cautery on the neck leaving two bones with two cauterizations sequentially produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the lungs are old and spreading through veins and arteries in the prominent part of the head outside and it is confirmed that this is due to excessive phlegm, then apply a cautery with the one we recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water affecting the lungs, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head and two cauterizations at each temple leaving two temples, and two cauterizations at each neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have difficulty with addition, then apply a cautery over the entire length of the ribcage in the area at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the treatment of nasal fetidness.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating it with what we have said in the division and your medicine does not improve, then prepare and give three nights of milk to the patient; and then cut the head of the patient and apply a mixture of olive oil and cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply a cautery with a thorn oil on each eyebrow leaving some hair, and two small cauterizations.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And watch that the artery does not burn there.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is how the thorn oil cautery should be applied.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the treatment of the lungs' eyelid by cautery for soothing.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the lung is soothed due to illness or dampness, then apply a cautery on that eyelid using this lunar cautery. This is how it should be:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows with a small point of the cautery on all sides, and let them extend to the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to how much of the inner part of the eyelid is heated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Regarding the cautery of the eyelid when the skin turns into parts inside and at the palm of the hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the hand turns into parts inside and when it touches the palm, if you place the hand, apply a cautery in two ways: a hot cautery or one with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you apply a hot cautery to them, ask the patient to display their skin like those who undergo circumcision, until they are extended and equalized; and if you place that hand at its origin, then strengthen the hands of the patient with one bend so that it does not hurt as long as the skins are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient on your seat, and approach to mark on the eyelid of the hands with a sign that resembles a pine needle figure, and let the beginning of the sign be near the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And approach with about half an inch in thickening in album from urine or in pus of pustule on the hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And approach lighting the cautery which has this form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And approach cauterizing on the figure that was marked, little by little in spots visible, while burning the surface of the skin which resembles a pine needle entirely outwardly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of health in the operation is that you see the eyelid of the hand already contracted and the skin of the patient elevated above the puncture of the hand.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and let that for three days, and approach to place the edge on him in a bandage until the scab is formed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And attend to that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if for any cause there returns to their birth parts and the eyelid is softened, then do another operation on that whole again as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and is equalized so that the skin does not hurt the hand.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cauterization with burning medicine is that you ask the patient to display their skin until they are extended and equalized, and approach it being done by a strip of cloth in the shape of a pine needle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some known soap and live ash for an ink. I., o let us do this, and approach mixing these ashes with water, applying it quickly without cooling; and then spread this over the cloth which is made like a pine needle shape, place that on one hand or both; and place your patient's head on your seat.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the above on the medicine and press that a little but do not hurt under which the patient feels the sensation of the medicine, which sensation is in him as from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you notice that the patient feels a biting sensation, then remove the medicine and place it on your seat; and when the biting stops, then reapply the medicine with water; and then consider if the eyelid has been lifted as it is cleaned from the scab by fire or incision, which is now done. And if it does not return to that part of the medicine on the spot where the medicine was applied and does not burn under until your operation is equalized and the hand is contracted again.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And approach to place the edge on him with a bandage until the scab of adjustment is eradicated, and then attend that with a final ointment or another until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And for this, you must preserve vigilance in your operation that the medicine does not fall from it on the hand, and if the eyelid is softened within several days and some cause of skin pain nears the hand, then apply your medicine to that place which makes the eyelid soft, precisely as at the beginning, and attend him until he heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a pine needle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that men's hands vary according to size and minuteness, so according to this your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let there be no disguise of the way towards rectitude towards that toward which study has been devoted in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Regarding the cautery of fistula that is in the tear duct of the hand.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not apply your treatment, then you should know how to cauterize that according to this method: ask the patient to place their head on your seat, and make one of their ministers hold their head between your hands so that it is neither hurt nor disturbed under their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And approach placing the edge on thickened in urine paste or pus of pustule on the hand of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat up the cautery tool which this is in the form of:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is curved, like the shape of a cane or a bird's wing, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it penetrates into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to pull it out like trying to catch something.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But whoever is curved is better for this work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if there's an opening, press the fistula if it's opened, and cleanse and dry that area with it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open that and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place your hand on the patient with the heated cautery which should be well lit, and hold that near to where you are going to remove from the nostril a little bit of the edge of the cautery, so as not for your hand or the patient to become agitated, then stop the cautery at the back part of the nostril and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus if during the start of your cautery it enters into the mouth, that's good; and otherwise, then heat up the cautery again once or twice if needed; and leave that there for three days, and then place a bandage around it with a layer of dried grease inside so that it becomes healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if it has passed more than ten days and is not healed, then place a piece of corrosive acid medicine inside the mouth until the bone is exposed and scrape according to what seems appropriate in your judgement.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way to cauterize a fistula that some of the early doctors suggested: take to the location of the fistula and make an incision there and place close above that cut a thin layer as its shape is; then put inside that a bit less than one unit of melted lead; hold your hand properly with good control, so as not to alarm the patient because the melted lead does not go into the nostril; and cover the nostril of the patient with a bandage dipped in egg white or water, when you place lead around the fistula it heals that miraculously through healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the healing of the fistula with what we have said about the cautery and the treatment is good, that's fine; otherwise, then it's necessary to administer medicine up the nose and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to where it naturally belongs.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Regarding the cautery of the cut on the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Wounds that appear to result in cuts, particularly in the labia, occur more often in children's labia.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat those cuts with what we have told you about the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then heat up this small knife according to this form that we show:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And make the cavity according to the thinness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And place that initial cut in those cuts so that the cautery reaches the base of the cuts.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Regarding the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there's pus in the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, and then it swells up, and after that it bursts open, and becomes old, causing inflammation; this leads to a fistula formation. You should treat this condition without deepening the treatment.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing is removed and it heals, that's fine; and otherwise, then it's necessary to discover the location and expose the infected bone according to what seems appropriate in your judgement.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Regarding the cautery of teeth and soothing of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are affected, treating those with medicines without causing complications, then position your head over where it should be in relation to this situation. Heat up the cautery tool like what you will do similarly, making sure that when you place your hand on the tooth and insert the heated cautery quickly into its location, your head is just slightly inside so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then raise your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery for several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then have the patient drink water from a salt bowl and keep that for an hour, and then you can stop that. In this way, the decayed tooth is hardened, inflamed gum is soothed, and dampness in the mouth is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of toothache through cautery.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to cold or worms, or if the treatment doesn't respond to medicine, then treat with cautery in two ways: either apply it near the roots of the teeth, or apply it directly on the fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery near the roots is when you take cow's roots and boil them in iron vessel. Then cut off a piece and wrap it around the tip of the needle, and then immerse that in boiling water. Place that over the painful tooth as quickly as possible until it gets cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then apply this several times so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see this, soak wool or cloth in the boiling water above mentioned, and place that over the painful tooth, and place iron that is burning inside so that the heat of the iron reaches the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the treatment with fire is that you wait for the embers or iron to heat up, and if there's any roughness in its core, so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery to what shape it will come in, and place that on the tooth while keeping your hand underneath until the cautery gets cold; do this several times when the pain starts to subside or on the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And when the patient feels the heat of that cautery filling their mouth with good water and keeps it for an hour, then they should drink; this is how the cautery works.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply cautery to whatever area you see as necessary according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of hernias through cautery.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are due to phlegm and fluids that do not respond well to digestion through medicines, and you see a slight improvement in their digestion, then ignite the cautery with this form: having two hubert tips so that the smoke from one end should be directed towards the other end of the cautery. Place the ignited cautery on that lump for one time, and if you need further applications, do it while its heat reaches the root of the lump.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the lump is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the lump. Lay it out for three days and then rest on it with a moistened cloth while letting what the fire has burnt remain there.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the cannula or the way to apply cautery for this purpose should be as described.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the treatment of inflammation and constriction through cautery.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture enters the channel of the lung, especially when this is due to cold constitution, you should guide that person to start with medicine laxatives at meals, and then treat by applying cautery near the navel in the area where the discomfort is felt.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And remember, do not let the cautery reach the navel or don't burn too much of their body with this procedure but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And treat that area by applying another cautery near the junction of the neck and at the lower part of the spine of the person.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the treatment for the person's elbow follows the same manner as previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with whatever was previously mentioned until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the treatment of lung illness and cough through cautery.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung illness are due to moisture, and the patient doesn't have fever or scabies, but it is old cough, then apply two cauteries on the sternum in the areas where discomfort is felt in the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples. And for elbow treatment, follow the previous method for that.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, do your cautery-pointing with the type of cautery that is called "puncta", its form which we previously described in the point-pressing method for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points inside the cay; and then treat that area by applying what was previously mentioned until it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And for each cautery, have three points; for that treatment you can make three cauteries in this manner:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the treatment of pinkeye, which is at the head of the eye.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the eye is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return immediately in its usual way, you should return its dislocation while it's still in the state where it usually returns. Then gently move it so that it gets back into place as we have demonstrated. If it needs to be pushed back further, first reduce the dislocation, then have the patient lie on his or her two hands or palms up, and lift the neck which is at the inner corner of the eye towards the forehead with your left hand fingers touching the part above those points of your left hand if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And prepare two points for the cautery; this is how it works:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And apply the cautery between where it penetrates into the other side; and here comes the diagram of the cautery treatment when using two points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and those subtle ones according to the amount of substance; this is how it works:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some operations are adjusted according to this count and for these reasons, there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And place your hand over the cautery to apply salt, and then attach the patient to the bed, so that the body is not disturbed for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in parts above and the fracture is made this way, then apply the cautery to the muscle around the cautery or on bone points, where the joint is confirmed and moisture is increased, thus healing the patient.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the treatment of gastric cautery.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and moisture accumulate in the stomach, causing an excess of its constitution leading to multiple swelling issues, if you continue with these methods of treatment without addressing them, then it's understood that the patient should be lying on their back with arms and legs extended. And apply three cauterizations: one to the feet with a quantity equivalent to one finger in a gastric cautery, and with two cauterizations at both sides of the stomach area, allowing for triangular-shaped marks; and extend those that are not properly adjusted to produce oozing.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery corresponds to the two thirds of the thickness of the stomach wall.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the appearance of the cautery matches this form it is an addition, and if you wish, apply a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery according to the circular form as shown here:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauteryed until it's scared by that part of the cautery: and you apply points on the stomach according to the amount of substance in salt, and then apply the cautery around those points; and cure that with the treatment which precedes its healing.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the treatment of gastric cautery.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When experiencing stomach pain due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind leading to an imbalance through excess egress from its normal constitution, if the patient is treated with what we have discussed and no recovery occurs, then it's understood that the patient should be lying on their back, applying three cauterizations according to this form and half of this quantity over the stomach area between the hips, in the anatomical position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and make the cauteries according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And don't hesitate with your hands on the cauterization points.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of substance that is applied corresponds to the majority of the stomach's constitution, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then lie down, which already extends their limbs, and lift their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is how the cautery should look:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is within your capability to perform these cauteries with surgical knives, when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And remember not to overdo the cautery process, and ensure that the substance of the entire stomach is applied so it reaches throughout the body, especially where the stomach is subtle; be aware of this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On piercing and treating an abscess in the stomach with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When experiencing excitement or an abscess in the stomach and you want to know if that abscess is within the stomach flesh or in its lining, then if it's within the stomach flesh, the patient experiences a significant drop in weight and increased pain intensity.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it's within the stomach lining, then the pain is intense and frequent, often causing doctors to tire from treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then understand that the patient should be lying on their back; and place your hand over the location of the abscess with salt; and prepare the cautery which is similar to a needle, as its shape was described in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply the cautery until all of the stomach is heated up, until it reaches the cholecyst, and until the patient feels relief.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And treat that by curing the other abscesses until he/she is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And don't use this method of cautery except for those that are studied in the art of medicine and in which various stomach maladies have been recognized; however, sometimes some operations might cause discomfort on this procedure, but remember that you should follow this one, and it's better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the treatment of ulcers with cautery.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries used for the arteries in ulcers are performed according to this manner, and you should take this from the arteries of aristocracy: a long, dried artery, which is found, and it should be as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And you submerge that in oil and heat that there, and place a cautery over that spot which is between the continuation of the sternum and the rib cage; and with two cauterizations apply this way, one declining towards the part where the beard is left, and with two cauterizations at that point declining between the fifth rib and the spine, one declining towards behind; and another cautery in the middle location of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at those points behind; and a cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations from each side of the foot, let this cautery be placed where there are two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not remove your hand from the cautery, but rather in front of the patient's suffering is it that you should apply it.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they would say that some ancient ones, among the men who use a kind of iron cautery resembling rays and flames, place that in that spot which is between the ribs, until it reaches from that to that soreness and becomes healed, as we have said about that soreness in the stomach.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	And within this puncture with cautery there is not much fear, for you have just experienced it in the place of the fistula where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the liver.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat liver disease as we have discussed for treatment in the division and do not apply your cure to it, then apply cautery on it according to three ways, all of which are curved, of which one is to make three or four lines along the length of the liver according to the shape of the liver's cauteries, which I have described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery there should be the width of a finger or less, and the method of the cautery is the same method that we have described for the stomach's cautery equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not remove your hand from the cautery; and the patient should lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of applying cautery, that being you ignite the cautery with two streams of flame, which we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and raise the patient's body in a position where it can reach the liver from the left side without moving.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And make your elevation as you raise the body according to the length of the torso, so that the cautery is applied according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both streams inside, ignite the fire, in that place where you enter the body from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations have been done.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see it, apply a three-stream cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the wound of the cautery if it has left behind too much discharge for too many days; as often this is considered more important than other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize only in the arms, not in any other part in dropsy.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy as we have discussed in the division and do not apply your cure to it, then follow this procedure: cautery four times around the umbilical circuit, one on the stomach, another on the spleen, another on the liver, two more between the shoulders, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be about the width of the body.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then smooth out the wound until it can freely allow discharge for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery as this would cause two types of misunderstanding for you, and it should be treated with medical assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery for that which is applied to the abdomen should be like a keyhole according to its previous form, and for the one which is applied over the two, it should resemble an olive in accordance with its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen in dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you should apply the cautery to the feet above the elbows, even between the wrist and finger bones. Lift your hand towards the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, do not move it completely, as the watery fluid will drain out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The shape of the cautery is as follows: Then make two cauterizations on each thigh, and for any thing done, apply a cauterization at the end of the knife-like part.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cauterizations along the length of the thigh: keep this one at the knee and the other in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And smooth out the opened wound for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And treat those causes as we have described them.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of belly flesh.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When belly flesh is due to fomentation and dampness causing congestion, these are the digestive and retentive qualities that are in the stomach and intestines, it is treated as we have discussed for treatment without applying anything else, and sometimes the patient suffers from a vertuity-causing cautery, then apply large cauteries on their stomach according to what preceded in the stomach's cautery, with the circulatory cauterization and four small cauterizations around the subtle umbilical circuit, with keyhole-like subtle cauterization; and apply cauterization on the liver area over a large spot, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you see the excess of dampness and the patient tolerating it, then apply a cautery to that above the navel and on the intestines, and strengthen him by adjusting several cauteries around the stomach and before the inguinal area, which is the perfect cure for youth illness in which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When dealing with old hemorrhoids or those filled with thick fluids or corrupt dampness, which were treated as we explained in the division and do not provide your cure, then apply a cautery to three spots on the pus left behind by the two small and triangular areas. And perform the second cauterization above the umbilical cord line for two dits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you determine that the stomach of the person is chilled and their food is not properly digested, and their face times are swollen, then apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been previously stated; and perform one cauterization on the chest, and another on their belly. Do the same with the elbow area, and let each cauterization rest for some time in an open space, and shortly after cure them until they are healed internally.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cautery of the testicles near the location of their absorption.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the testicles, then you apply the prepared cautery that resembles a ray's tail.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place the burning part of it on that testicle in the process of being removed, and complete your hand's movement so that the cautery reaches to the opening of the vein from which the sperm flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times, if the testicles are too large, then apply to each according to what we have recounted, and shortly after cure those with what you give them of ointment until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you apply a large cautery to the surface area, it is more effective in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cautery of fistulas that naturally occur in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the procedure we recommended in its location, and the patient is frightened by this, let them be cured through a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when some disease manifests in nature as an old and infected fistula with pus, which is the source that should be treated gently, you must apply a subtle cure to it. Then understand the depth of the lesion based on this indicated method.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And apply the cautery that resembles the shape of a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place the burning part of the cautery in this fistula, according to the depth of the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly inside until those corrupted bodies are burned out, once or twice or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn nerves or veins. Or if the fistula goes towards the bladder or the intestine, then be cautious of all those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshly location and you consider it non-penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and all materials are removed from it, but remains like this for a long time, then know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the substances are not yet removed from you, then know that it is penetrating or in your own body they have become corrupted, or comes from those causes which will bring recurrence in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of the bladders.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the bladders there is pain through cold or due to excessive wind, and the chest below the belly is hardened, then know that you should apply a cautery on the bladders with a cauterization over each bladder, followed by a cauterization of the elbow area where you seek recurrence.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly apply a second cautery on the slightly smaller area, so that three linear cauterizations come about, and thus they are more effective in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and softening in the bladder due to cold and dampness such that the belly does not retain urine, then apply a cautery on the area just below the bladder, starting from where the skin begins at the navel. Apply one cauterization on the right side part, and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cauterization according to the depth of the foot's marks; apply one cauterization with a cauterization on the lowest part of the two sides; or make two cauterizations if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And do the elbow cauterizations as instructed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cautery of the womb.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is coldness and dampness in the womb, thereby preventing pregnancy, and the periods become corrupted for her, and their induction is delayed, and pain occurs during childbirth, then know that this place should be treated with three cauterizations around the umbilical region, as we have instructed for the bladder cautery; and do so on the area just below the two sides, or make two cauterizations there, and perform elbow cauterization.
Capitol .xl.	The first sentence translates as: "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors."
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	The translation of "De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua." is: "About the cautery treatment for the dislocation of the ankle."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	The translation of "Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor." is:
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The translation of "E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt." is:
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	The translation of "Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle." is:
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	The translation of "E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac." is:
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	The translation for "E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran." is:
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The translation for "E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat." is:
Capitol .xli.	The text "Capitolo .xli." translates as "Chapter 41" in English.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	The translation of "De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica." is: "About the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	The translation of "Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel." is:
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The translation of "E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc." is:
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The translation for "Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat." is:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	The translation for "E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran." is:
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	The translation for "Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris." is:
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	The translation for "E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena." could be:
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	The translation for "E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa." is:
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	The translation for "Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra." is:
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	The translation for "E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena." would be:
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	The translation for "E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel." is:
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	The translation for "E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar." is:
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in all cautery procedures, do not end the process until you have left the cautery as long as it burns nerves or major arteries, and thus you are above injuring or constricting the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one or two of those who would apply the cautery to the cavity and lastly in the process of cautery, and the bedfire inflamed within causing the tumor to achieve the foot, and was perforated and corrupted throughout the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And soon there is a strong belly solution, and thus death occurs.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And it is said by the wise in the process of applying an iron cautery, like this method: make as if it was a circle of iron where its circumference is about half a palm; and place its opening according to the size of a bone of a finger or perhaps a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle is another tool; and leave the space which is between them equal to the thickness of your foot; and those circles are opened in two parts; and the length of those cuts is about half an inch or one inch, and make in those marks on iron decently arranged in the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And let it be heated in the fire until it heats up and sends sparks out, and let it be placed over the part of the iron, the patient standing on their left side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that with three round cauterizations in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let that rest for three days; and then plaster that with a paste, and let the opened wound heal without too many days; and then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diagnosing Al-Zahrawi: oh, children, for this type of cautery we have used it due to the lack of attention towards him, and thus we have found those who care about him.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	The number of iron cauterizations you endure, find that place in yourself.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	The number of cauterizations that adhere to medicines is that you make two circles having a hole in each where the smell of iron escapes; and let the length of the edges be about half an inch or perhaps those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each one the size of the thickness of your finger; and make them below and above, and let them contain themselves among each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the part of the iron where the patient stands on their left side, and hold your hand over the part of the iron; and take hot water and put it between two circles, and let its quality be like small fire, and keep that for about an hour, and let the patient feel the biting and adjusting - as if they are bitten by fire - until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand towards the instrument and wipe off all the hot water from the entire iron with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let that rest for three days and place the plaster over it until you see the color of the adjustment deepened, and let this be like several days, and there will be no more pus coming from your wound; this is further in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or the leg, make the patient stand in that position where contains water as it is done with the iron.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in my treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of fire not extinguished from both by one part, and mix them in a new wave where the part left is pierced through a small tool, according to the amount that enters into your iron.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the wave another wave again, pour over that live alkali and earth with lukewarm water which absorbs them by one finger, and when you squeeze those in your own hand well, let the foam that escapes from your sharp water in the part left to the new wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, pour it over fresh live earth and new alkali, which will then exhibit strong corrosive action, this is administered in powdery surgical treatments and in cauterizations of other limbs, this operation is done with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among some medicines that are cauterized extensively, like tumeric and honey and earth with fat in it, let them be mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulia recounting of a procedure from the ancients for operation and healing which treats pain in the leg and sciatica, praises this method greatly and says that no other treatment is necessary, and that it becomes healthy all at once as recommended, and that he feels good and is well already with that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be close to certarragi vert if that is not found, use a recent fig; and let it be finely ground with a little oil and placed in water where the pain is, or in the thigh or leg, and tie it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for about three hours or until the patient notices improvement in their condition.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put it on fire and when the patient's body has reddened, introduce that into the sun where the pain disappears and they become healthy.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it should not be used by anyone with a cautery on these medicines, but rather close to the body's purification.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And it is known that when the goat has a vein rupture and there is a bleeding, it is cauterized, which benefits the patient more; and do this with the cautery according to this manner: take wool and soak it in antiseptic oil, then place it between the chest and ribs.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And it is necessary to make an incision in the dried goat and apply the flame inside where the wound has been made, with charcoal; then place it on the wool and let it burn until the skin stretches.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And continue with this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches inside the water and rests on the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cautery is called cattle's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of two pains.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains occur in both due to various causes, such as injury or impact, or due to excessive purification, and through causes similar to those, by the infusion of wet and rough matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not for cuts but only in this single type which is done through the effusion of rough matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then know that the purification of the intestines is with pills and resembles them, which are made over each of the two areas where there is pain in three lines according to the width of it. Since signs appear in every line you apply a cautery or more, according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate and its effectiveness.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And do the cautery with pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, apply three or four points of cautery on each side as follows:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cauterization for the beginning of gallbladder issues.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Some common symptoms due to this illness in infants; and signs of the beginning of it in children are that they occur over their body, causing swelling and elevation, as well as movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you can feel in the lower part of the spinal column in infants where it begins to rise above other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you perform this and wish to stop it, then apply the cautery around that in the following manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Let the cautery cover all parts of the spinal column equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, apply the pointed cautery around the spinal column in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And afterwards, treat the area until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Remember that cautery should not be administered in jaundice caused by muscle spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that are contained in every part of the body, and when it causes pains in the feet, this is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And how does gout caused by friction get cured using a method of cure and not leaving the pains untreated, it is treated with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And what you do is apply the cautery around for purification in the area of the joint on each side as cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And use olive oil, which has this form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise inside each hollow or to other joints, and these signs are observed, then apply three or four points of this olive oil cautery on each hollow.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you apply these cauteries that are necessary to you, then apply the cautery and do not press too hard on your hand before it, just around the size of the hairpin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains are inside each hollow and two, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in their chests and it is called gout, then pierce in the area around the veins as they move, pierce those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in their thumbs, then pierce around the veins on each finger and over the pulse of your hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise close to several days in the elbows or muscles, then apply the points around all parts of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not allow the intestines to move and receive medicines well; for if they are given good movement and warmth is provided by this cautery, then purification will occur, God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is rupture in the arteries and discussing the hernias in front of the opening to the abdomen, as this begins from here, then know that you should instruct the patient to leave their food for the day and use gentle causes so that the egressing wound of their stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And continue guiding the patient between your hands on their back, and command that they keep their breath while it is being processed or when the opening or hernia appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to your fingers, and try to rupture it on the bones of the ankle with a signal indicating the end which is similar in size to half-circle parts of the body's lower parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat up the cautery like this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	So that sparks are produced and glowing embers form.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand on the spot to prevent the intestine from protruding.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, and had another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest to hold their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand and the tip of the cautery straight, enter that into where you feel the bones of the ankle in the middle of your field; repeat this for another time if you haven't succeeded in the first attempt up to the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the consistency of the hernia when you are about your cautery operation; do not burn that hernia too much because it could cause death or other severe harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you use the cautery near the bones, do not touch them directly; if you do so, your operation will be incorrect.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the size of the cautery for children should be fine depending on their size and measurement.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then, over the next three days care for the site of the cautery with a poultice until the scab from the heat has hardened.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And continue to treat that with other ointments until it heals.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient rest on their back for ten days until the site and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you should feed the patient according to the duration of their recovery time; this stretches their stomach and ensures that the hernia does not protrude due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to remove this after about ten days, administer medication properly and have them rest for another ten days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And make sure they have rest from labor and plenty of food and drink, as well as vigorous activities; when they use this complete regimen of treatment, they will fully recover.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will tell you the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, starting from the beginning, and when you don't allow them to rest, then cauterize that rupture with a round point cautery according to your patient's size; this is like removing a segment of it as if it were another part. And then treat that as we have said, and do not adjust it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already tell about certain first things where the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this manner, because it is indicated like so:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And draw a line that extends past the width at the bottom of the rupture, and another line above it. And place your hand with a triangular cautery; for the first cautery, make it smaller and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter forty-six.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Regarding the treatment of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in any limb due to dislocation or impact, and if the pain continues for a long time without showing improvement with medicine, then know that you should treat it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And size and shape of the limb dictate how to use the cautery, along with its strength and development, as well as the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the first cautery results in recovery, then it's good; otherwise, apply another round of cautery. For usual pains, punctures are made on the limb closest to the patient, as you should find those punctures with a cautery until the patient recovers.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter forty-seven.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Regarding the treatment of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some areas may require cautery treatments for several months, and especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And if you want to cauterize that area, assess whether it is contagious and treat it with the remedy we described in the division, without delay or hesitation. If you're concerned about the patient's health as corruption could spread throughout their body and affect their entire structure, then cauterize that area on top of their head: one in the middle of the head, and another slightly above it; place the forehead at the end of the hairline; apply two around each ear; and have one behind, on the neck or jaw.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And place your hand with the cautery for a little while until it starts to exert pressure in the bone, and if there are any dislocated lumps, so that their expiration of thick vapors is relieved; then cauterize on the lump according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread to the back and is clearly visible, then know that you should cauterize that area with those cauteries we have mentioned in the head; apply a cautery on the end of the nose, two cauteries on each earlobe, two on both collarbones, five on the ribs, one large near the ankle, one on the sternum, and two on each elbow. Cauterize that area over all joints of these and his feet, as well as every single heel, and over each of his knees, and over each of his elbows, and over each knuckle, and over each of his kneecaps, and over muscles, and over tendons near his ankle; cauterize that area on all joints of the mentioned parts and his feet, as well as over every single heel.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And protect yourself from the nerves that are on the foot, do not damage those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some burns are treated with a cautery on the bones of the ankle and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the intestines.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more precisely you apply cauteries, the better and faster they heal. And know that in a patient with a fever, there is no pain from the cautery, just like when it's raining cats and dogs, for their body has become numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the size of the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what is suitable for the tools used.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with ground bee's wax mixed with honey and another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the application of cauteries in fever.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is swollen or numb and is treated with medicines, bandages, but if it does not heal, then you apply cauteries to that swollen limb according to the size of the limb or its diminution.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate slightly into the heat of the blood vessel.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes burns are treated by applying to certain fevers which affect the majority and the feet, as well as the spinal column of both sides, and remove the heat of the nerves that belong to that limb, and it is refreshed by the fever.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Don't guess about this unless that person is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout moving parts of the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the application of cautery to those that are whitened.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are old and do not respond to any of the medicines' ointments, then you apply a cautery on that with a slight touch according to the amount of heat in the blood vessel inside. The whiteness and color of it should be renewed, and its color should change.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with bee's wax and lentils mixed with olive oil, and with leaves of arnica, or with poultice from dove's dung or with poultice from apricot kernels. Each from each type should be used in equal parts, all mixed together, and apply a plaster thereon until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the application of cautery to children.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want it to stop, then apply the cautery in a circular manner around it as it turns.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be treated with the inner part of the cautery at the center; however, I have not seen this way before, fearing it might be infected, and I have seen some burns in this manner.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And the pus that is outside should be treated with a circle of cautery as we have said, or with small pieces of cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the application of cautery to abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any abscess takes longer to mature, and this is due to the excessive formation of pus, or due to the patient's old age in decrepitude, having few strengths, or due to time, and you want to hasten its maturation; then apply small pieces of cautery in a circular manner around it; and smooth that which will facilitate its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want the perforation of it with cautery, then heat the cautery in this shape: and leave that at the center of the abscess until the blood penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed in that place where pus is left, because it relieves the body's arm; and then treat that until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the application of cautery to corroding (possibly meaning ulcers or other skin conditions).
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is an infectious spread in the limb, which eats away at that as wood burns when it is eaten by fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you see this corrosion in the place that suffers from heat, then apply small and large pieces of hot cautery as it is convenient in the place where there is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply cautery to all parts until you eradicate all the corrosion without causing any harm to it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave that for three days, and place on the treated areas some oil mixed beforehand until all scabs have been eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with meat-producing ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if after three days the healthy meat grows in what is not corrupted, it's good; but if not, then repeat this process on that which has been corrupted in the affected areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated for some days with an acute medicine, which is half on the site of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery from heat in pus produces a mild youthfulness.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment of this with acute medicine in the section, therefore take that when you have prepared it for him.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the application of cautery to lumps and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Warts that appear on the affected parts of the body that are called lumps, they are a large cause, invading, which weighs down the body; and applying cautery to those is done in two ways: with hot cautery and with boiling water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	A hot cautery is used where you heat the cautery tip like a piece of red-hot iron. This tool is made of metal according to its capacity to contain the key part of any operation, and it has thin grooves.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that flame on the key, and then rotate your hand around the cautery within the curve of the key so that the cautery reaches the depth of the key.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let that be done for three days until it starts to scab over.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then cover that with treacle-soaked bandages impregnated with salt, and let the bandage stay on that for one night, until the worm is eradicated from its nest.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a healing meat grease until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if they do not convert, and blisters break out on the surface of the body, especially on the buttocks and feet, then you should apply these cautery treatments with water. And take a small tube of earth or iron or red-hot iron, and place it over the key; and pour in the water a little quantity, and twist your hand, and turn that around with pressure from all parts of your hand, and press the edge of the tube onto the key's nest, and make the hot water flow into the exit channel of the cautery; and let the patient endure the biting sensation of the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, until the key is eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this with those and next to each other, making sure you cover all of them on their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those abscesses where the worms of the keys have been eradicated with that from the grease which the meat generates.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol, 53.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Regarding the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you are dealing with tremors due to friction on nerves or fever resulting from friction, or any similar cause, then it is customary to apply four cauterizations or five times on the ribs of the back, between each rib having one cauterization; and on their feet, and over the stomach area, you should perform an olive-like cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides, and facilitates the recovery of the illness.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol, 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are pus-filled wounds in the body, which are made of thick corrupted substances; therefore, as soon as they appear, it is to be treated by applying a cautery over all parts of the fistula with a thin stick of myrrh, where the tip is extended into fire; or with long wormwood stumps; or with a conical-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some blisters are to be treated with cautery during their expulsion process in this manner; they should not be popped, and the excess is allowed to drain away from those areas, thereby healing them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is advisable that this should be done in conjunction with bloodletting therapy for evacuation.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol, 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Regarding the cautery treatment for bleeding infections caused by the puncturing of veins.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When you encounter bleeding from a vein that needs to be punctured due to infection, or if it's necessary to make incisions in swellings or apply cautery on the limb, then do this process while keeping everything similar, and it becomes difficult to keep that situation.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And when it happens with any of them, then cover your hand over the orifice of the vein, and place it on the said hard spot, inside which keep that bleeding from the infection where you indicated, and do not allow it to stop.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive-shaped cauteries for few and large times in number over those until they ignite.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large depending on the location and wound where the artery has ruptured, over that vein as you have indicated, and do it with haste once you have covered your said area, and apply cautery until the infection is eliminated and restrained.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the artery's orifice when you have covered your said area and removed the cautery, then take another small cautery among those that are prepared in the fire, therefore do not cease to perform this one after another until the bleeding is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And remember not to burn the nerves here, which might bring other harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four ways applies: or apply this cautery as we said, or if extraction is made and not extracted, when it is extracted its ends are burned and the bleeding is restrained; or they are tied with string or ligature by strong constriction; or they are laid over medicines whose virtue is to restrain the bleeding; and they are strengthened with poultice in proper restriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Apply that which restrains the patient's condition with ligature and constriction through positions of burning causes and similar methods, do not impose it except in moderation.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this needs to be done and the doctor is not present or medicine available, then open according to the indication on that vein as we have said, understand within the patient's large constriction until the bleeding stops from the major part of the wound, and over the artery do not cover it; and over the artery apply with a cold friction water until the blood coagulates and thickens; and consider which needs to be cauterized or medicine required.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Start the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	From incision, puncture, suction, phlebotomy, pus, and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have discussed in the first chapter all of malaise for which a burning cautery is appropriate and burn medicine, as well as opportunities and causes for it, and the instruments necessary among the forms of cauterization; I have organized the chapters on the body's ascent into the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter according to that medical manner, so that the one who desires it may be relieved, now about what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, child, learn that in this chapter it is about extending what was in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because of this you should be careful in it, which is about the operation that is in this chapter where there are cuts that can lead to evacuation which depends on your health from the application of the vein or cut above the boil or puncture for pus release or purification of the plague or removal of needle or incision in the flesh and their appearances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear, trembling, and at their worst, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that do not let this happen to you in which there is a risk, for some precautions should be taken by you as with various methods of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them will die from their disease and it is a minor matter for them to die, also because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and due to the duration of their illness, and in sickness fear means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And those are the ones who give you their account and statement, hoping for that health, and their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so do not consent to what someone comes to you about this manner; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your gluttony; and do not presume any cause about it unless you have certain knowledge that verifies this for you, and from which reasonable success follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your illnesses by predicting and indicating what becomes of them when it is converted to health, so that there is assistance for you regarding acquisition of fame and memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God breathes his understanding into you and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what was in the first chapter on cauterization, for the treatment of the body into feet, so that you may be relieved of what you requested and of which you need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Treatment of water, which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness, which often befalls children, is called infantile sickness and when the child grows stronger, its head becomes livid.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some cuts due to a concealed cause that is unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have only seen this illness in children; and for all those I saw they died, thus it seems to me that the dying has been shown in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was full of water, the head of which was always thus magnificated within that it could not cease to be on itself due to the size of its head, and more than the humidity increased within that became death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is added between bone and the skull, or it is added to you from the outside on the scalp.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	So that in that operation if the moisture is between bone and the skull and there is a small boil, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head through a crack in the width, and let the length of the crack drain two nights until the moisture comes out, and this is the form of pus:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the boil is larger, then these are two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is outside of the skull, its sign is that you open all corners of the head and water squirts out when you press that against your own hand at the inside parts and it is not this hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if you make an incision in the middle of the head through three cracks according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And the cut should extract all of the moisture; and reinforce the cracks with bandages and feathers; and on the fifth day apply vinegar and oil, and then relieve the muscles and treat the wound with herbs and ointments, and strengthen the head with equality; and eat the sick with dry meat of little moisture until that member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And it is another way of cutting that you consider according to the size of the boil and the collection of water; some cuts are more in the occipital region, or at the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; so pay attention to where the boil appears and the filling with water, and do this as best suits you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that don't cut the artery and allow streams of blood to flow out so that you can relieve the illness by the flow of blood and eliminate moisture.
Capitol .ii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From cutting into arteries which are close to the earlobes, they are commonly referred to as hemorrhages.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is trouble or pain in the hands or feet, and it continues for some time, if you do not treat it with medicines, then here begins the effective treatment of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to penetrate where the patient's head is causing its neck, then prepare the area with a hard cloth so that you can see the arteries, and strengthen the patient's neck with another cloth; and consider where the pulse beats; and press the places under those areas which are close to the earlobes, and if not in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place over the artery with your attempt, and penetrate each part of the sharp area at its beginning inside to the opening, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the tip of your tool into the artery and twist it in accordance with its entry points above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And make the length of the incision two inches long, for when any vein is cut, it causes an ache at its exit, which beats up and down frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery doesn't show up at the bend, then when you measure from the earlobe, take three inches of space, and place over with your attempt, and insert inside to the opening.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you must know about the pain is that it indicates a quantity of blood flow. and strengthen it as necessary for more or less, and all of this depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient's neck and the filling of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains over the bone any cause of swelling, then cut that so as not to create a pus pocket.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the wound with plasters and with strips of cloth, and heal that one with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter three.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Regarding the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or acute headache occurs due to dampness and the quality of those lumps in the temples, or an ancient strong one that resembles those, and is treated with medical curative methods and you don't agree, then we proceed to this disease: extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those similarly as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction is that when the patient's skin is in the temples; and understand the artery apparent in the temple area where it beats for you shown by its pulse, and is hidden only in a few people due to the strength of rubbing.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it's hidden from you, then strengthen the patient's neck with some cloth; and prepare the area with a hard cloth or boil water in that place so that you can clearly see the artery prominently.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take this tool, which is like this:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you heat the needle at that place for ease of passing into the artery; and apply oil on it and extract there in front of the parts; and extract from that part of the artery and discover those of the tunics which are left behind, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then wrap it at the tip of the onion, and cut out a portion from that according to the length by which its tips are spread and contracted, and do not create pain; if they are not cut, then the patient's blood will flow continuously.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And remove the blood of one unit. Into three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then when you hold it in two places with twice the strength of each or with strings long, do not let it decay before the healing of the wound and do not allow blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the excess that is between two cords; and do this either in this moment or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inside the opening and with a surgical knife where its extremities are incised, and remain in place for this task.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of cold complex; for cautery is from those causes that help in eliminating dampness, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And consider the extraction of arteries that you prefer in the middle of the neck, and be placed over the dust well prepared, and then treat it with dry medicines so that the flesh emerges and within where it heals.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another wound occurs and blood from the artery flows, then you must restrict that blood flow, or with cautery, or fill the neck area, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you, then pause your hand on the area until the blood cools down, and soak the area with water from intense coldness until the heat subsides, and strengthen according to what you see.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And when there is more pus in the extraction of an abscess, you should cauterize the vein at this point with a cautery that has two blades. You have already touched both spots on the skin, and then push fire into them so that it reaches the body and splits the vein in two places, for which reason it becomes extended where it is between the extremities of the patient, which are not hardened by all means at this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is how to perform the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of both blades be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if your skill allows for two blades to be sharper than two, where if they are sharp like two razors, and do not cut the flesh at speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is some thickness, heat the tip of these and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this technique is better in every work and even more so for the lighter ones.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between the two blades be equal to the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Headquarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of chests affected by sharp and acidic tears in the lungs.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When it is acid tears, and those are the veins that lie above the forehead when viewed from behind, and you do not associate any medical treatment with this cause, and the patient's face already reddens and walks around in their mind as if it were a walk of ants, and the breaths of those have been exhausted, wetted by this way that their skin is known, and their eyelids are scraped by the sharpness of the tears, the old ones prefer to treat those with this operation, and many undergo that treatment through this procedure.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to rub off the skin that is on their forehead, then proceed to cut into the forehead three equally spaced cuts according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut is two thumbs: one cut should be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the tear ducts which are under the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard yourself from the beginning of the veins which are in two sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each cut is adjusted to be three thumbs wide.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dried cloth, apply moist heat on those to which the sweat is released.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And insert the tip of two sharp points, here's how this incision would look on him:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	It goes from splitting at the junction between the first cut to the second.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the chain that lies between two cuts close to the root which is on top of the bone, and proceed with this incision moving towards the second cut.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then cut this point and insert another tool in the first incision; it is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Place the sharp side of this you must cut off the flesh and chain along with it, and the other end inside the bone, insert this tool where it reaches the second cut, and cut off all the veins that descend from the head to the lungs.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And let this cutting continue up to that appearance of the chain, and then proceed with this at the middle cut between the other cuts.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since it runs in the same amount of sweat quantity, squeeze out the spots of concentrated sweat together.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And proceed to pause in every cut for a while, and place on those ashes burned in vinegar and oil and vinegar, and makes sure not to develop an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day let him take off the dressing and applies large fumigations of boiled water or vinegar, and then treat this with balsam in oil among others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Head V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Regarding the treatment of tears through catarrhs and lungs descending from parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When on one vein of catarrh you cut and continue, and sometimes the lungs of the patient are exhausted, they weep, and their appearance is debilitated, and their eyelids are ulcerated with their color of skin, and in front of the head there is acute dental pain and consequent exhaustion, then know through these incidents that the materials and catarrhs do not come from veins of parts inside proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: command the patient to rub their forehead, then proceed to cut in a small incision at the middle of the forehead, little by its width (and start from the left temple incision to the right; and if the incision goes into the bone; and extend your hand along the cheeks which are swollen due to chewing), so that the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Sweat off all the sweat with a sponge or on a dry cloth, and then fill the two lips of the incision with ashes or on pieces of leather.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And proceed to strengthen it above with ashes burned in vinegar and oil, so that there is no development of an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove that and as the abscess has diminished, then it is known to rub inside the bone starting from their inner flesh, and then treat this with regenerative drying which makes the flesh sweat, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of beeswax and mix them, and make a poultice from them and apply it on these wounds as for the natural skin.
Capitol .vi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	From the cure of what happens in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that happen in the ears are of four types, one being like stone caused by mineral substances such as iron and lead, similarly to them. Another is plant-based, like cress or fava beans. The third is fluid-like, like water, wine, and what is similar to them. Lastly, it can be due to some animal cause.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when stone is found in the ear or some other cause similar to those causes that do not adjust and do not grow in the ear, place the ear near the sun. If you see the stone, then distill some of that particular substance from the oil that has gone rancid or saffron, take out its extraction, and make them sneeze under supervision. After which, let their noses expect a sneezing incident.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool near the circuit of the ear, and spread the ear to these parts above them, where hot spots are found to be caused by these conditions.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not getting heated, then administer its extraction with the instrument called the subtle epicyclic gesture of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it's heated by that gesture, good it is; otherwise, then administer its extraction with the delicate spoon of small duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it's not heated by this, then make a reed tube and insert the end of the tube into the canal of the ear and seal around the area of the tube with beeswax and soft, soothing oil, so that it only opens when the tube itself.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then remove through strong suction at the ear hole, where hot spots are found similar to what we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	May it be that if it's not heated in this manner, then take powdered alum or powdered vinegar to which some earwax is mixed in a small quantity, place that on the tip of your finger, and hold it near the ear opening, then wrap it properly around that.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert this into the canal of the ear with ease, and then proceed to dry out the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it's not heated by all the causes we've described, then take your knife to cut out that which turns into a boil or spasm in front of you.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting that out is as follows: at the beginning, you hold your patient's cephalic vein and cut where it starts, then proceed to extract according to the manner in which its essence flows. Then make a small incision between your fingers and convert the ear to these parts above, and create a tiny fissure near the root of the ear where his hair lies on the spot pressed by him.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack is of lunar shape and goes through to the stone, and if you find the stone blocked up, hold that in place with appropriate instruments if you can; then fill the crack with speed at that moment, and cure it inside until it's healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause caught in the ear is one that grows and inflates, then administer treatment and extraction for it; but if you don't agree with this, then take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer to remove that lump which is found in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And don't do this when you think that the lump is moistened by the ear's vapor; place it in hot spots and then extract from those either through the canals or with subtle gestures, or using an incision as described previously. The extraction should be relieved by this method.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	If the water which has entered into the ear canal causes your patient to sneeze at the beginning, then fill your patient's ear with a small amount of old wax and place it over that particular part of the ear where there is water. If it gets heated this way, good it is; otherwise, then take some small pebbles or shells according to their length relative to that described before, heat them slightly in the fire, have your patient put one near the canal of their ear and light a piece of their own hair on fire over that particular part of the ear, striking another stone against the stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then don't stop this until all the water within turns hot.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And as soon as the water starts turning hot, take a piece of paper or a match,. And place one end inside the ear and extend the other end into the fire until its tip is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another match and do this so many times until all the water is heated, then remove it with the tube described earlier for extracting stones.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the case of foreign animal matter entering that ear canal, if it's small and similar to it, cure it as we've said in the division; but if it's a large thing causing an obstruction in the inner ear, then administer its extraction through gestures and canals, and the cause is much easier than all other causes found in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	If you're dealing with worms that have been produced in the ear and are curing it as we've said in the division, and if your treatment doesn't seem to be working, then observe the ear under the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if here appears any cause of the worms, then extract that from the intestines or those subtle substances; but if no cause appears, then take one cannula and make it straighten out and expand from which this is the form of such.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the amount it suffers in the patient; then suck through that with strong suction, and do these punctures, within which all worms will be expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not observe your speed in this process, then fill and seal the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; administer distillations which have already been prepared for the treatment of worms, and find this matter in our discussion on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And when your effusion is into which you pour the medicinal oils in the ear with this instrument, of which this is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it from silver or amber, straightened out, with a small hole, and on the top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so as they are to be applied when it is in the cavity of the cannula here where their necessity arises.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the descending end of the cannula at the knee, then pour oil into the cavity of the auditory canal or juice from any herb, or whatever you choose of these medicines in the cannula — and that is inside the ear — then insert the rod at the knee and squeeze inside your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the auditory canal and the patient feels the oil internally.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is inserted in the ear should already be heated by fire to a small degree.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that the substance you will distill in the ear should not be too strong, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Title VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Regarding the treatment of wax in the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some pustules come from the womb of the elderly women without perforation, and this happens in some men, wax in the meat of the ear by infection or by nothing in that area; and this wax is sometimes made before the entrance of the auditory canal which does not know the movement, and some pustules are outside the parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens at the entrance of it, which does not comprehend movement, is in the older dispositions for difficult treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you gain movement, cover that the ear of the patient to the sun and look into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is visible pus, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where the width is small, for which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula is of two widths lion such that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the wax is due to flesh inside the ear or in its meat, then you have that with subtle needles and penetrate it vigorously inward until all the flesh is exposed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if wax is at the entrance of the ear, then take a subtle lion rod and heat that with fire just a little, then place it in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have sensed pus with what the patient feels with difficulty, by straining to hear, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and remember not to irritate the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place linen in the ear according to the size of the opening of the hole which you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or that you take some, insert it in water, pulverize it on the third day and use it; and if you see the ear already pierced, then remove what you used and replace it with another which you wrap in a bandage made of cotton that is soaked in oil, until the abscess ruptures; and then treat it while it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if there is a discharge of pus, then immerse the sponge or cloth in water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment which tightens the pus discharge, which is mentioned in our discussion on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Title VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Regarding the treatment of adhesions that occur to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Adhesions which stick to the eyelids of some people are moist, others' adhesions are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So scrape them with tweezers or with needles, and divide those with the use of a small spatula from their roots, then place on those spots after the third day.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if pain with pus discharge is present, then you apply a cautery to those with a subtle tuberculin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is near incisions and too many pus discharges return when there remains any cause at their roots; and when they are treated with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Title IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for inflammation that occurs to the eyelids of children.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Pimple-like inflammations that occur in the eyelids of children are caused by an assembly of something that increases in its size and hardness, and due to this increase it is called inflammation.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it's an increase in thick moisture on the eyelid and above it.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So, the operation for them is that you consider if the swelling is coming from within in the area where it appears on the eyelid and spreads everywhere; and the cause of this is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So cut across that seam in the width, and by facilitating it completely inside, make sure to evacuate, and place that under suspension, and discard that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you haven't identified the beginning of this condition then without pressing too much into the eyelid from its start gradually, in such cases there's usually no cause to worry.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with suture; and care for that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it's small, you won't encounter any harm in that quarter where the warmth of this restores and brings back to life that part.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid you should adjust it inwardly, then lift that eyelid and suspend the swelling under your hand, another that you would use from the start, press it all around, and if the eyelid is lengthened from its start, there's usually no cause for concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and care for that area until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capi.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the treatment above of the eyelid, on top of the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axsirnath is white, which is produced in the tunics of the eyelid above, and more so in children, intensifies the wounds among them and leads to their catarrh; and they cannot see the brightness of the sun because their tears are concentrated on those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for that purpose you rub those on their faces continuously, and they sleep on them; and the wet eyebrows of them leave on their eyelids, which have already covered puffiness, and the potentiality of irritation is visible in the eye; and when you press the area with your own words, you feel irritation within those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that where the patient rests their head on you, and then places a sheet under them and creates a space, and draws a circle according to the quantity which contains pus from all sides, and then pauses that over there and presses with your own words everywhere so that irritation accumulates in the middle of the circle, and at its center make a small incision perpendicular to the line on width, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in a paracentesis.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And in the proconsul's case where you cut through completely until you reach pus, which after that position proceeds pus through a small incision according to the shape of white whiteness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove those with the sheets which you enveloped between your own words at the front parts, and rotate back and forth between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to adjust in the small incision for yourself that under this you do not reach into the wound, and discard that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	And if you do not find pus at the beginning of the incision, then adjust in that incision a little with facilitation so that pus proceeds; and by the way remove this too as we said; and soak sheets from them in water and vinegar and place these on top, strengthen those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And in this way they pass salt and pause that at the cavity of the incision so that what remains from that moisture disappears.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess occurs in the wound, then care for that with plaster compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of touching the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of wounds are natural hairs adjusted by us, these are towards the wound and cause ways of maladies such as frequent tears and inflammation of the eyelids and tissue inside which this is a cause for destruction of the wound; it is called blanching of the wound. And treatment is done through four methods: or with cautery fire; or with acute medicine according to what was mentioned in the section on cauteries; or by lancing with an incision and suturing; or with canals as I direct you.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus when you place the head of the malady on your own side; then convert the eyelid of the wound to your left hand, if it is converted, then yes; and if not, insert a needle into that in which pus is located from the eyelid, make the needle penetrate through above, and this - near the margin of the eyelid where hairs are born - near the hairs, pull the thread upwards on the eyelids, and convert it to light.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then make in the inner part of the eyelid adjust your hairs to a needle that goes from the major tear duct into the lacrimal gland; and remove this needle and pause the eyelid with powder petal or cotton, and press on the eyelid with a finger, and it should look like the shape of a mint leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	And yet when it comes to the shape according to the amount of evacuation of the eyelid, which is already differentiated in humans, those that require being cut deeply from the eyelid depending on the amount for which the eyelid is swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make the incision along the two lines you marked, starting from the greater lacrimal into the lesser lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural folds such as that of the king's thickness.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the snout in one of the two corners of the chain, and thoroughly scrape that area, adjusting to the cut with both lips under the tongue or at the wool-thin fleece's throat. Clean any secretions, and remove excess from the hairs on the eyebrows for some causes requiring it, if you wish to do so; otherwise, leave them alone.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then change the bandages of the hairs every three or four days, and take care of that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, change the wound's stitches, and treat it with what dries and constricts. When the eyelid is lifted, you should seal the wound and add to it; more stitches are better, so do this every day following the traditions of surgery.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Yet in this you should concern yourself with the patient's condition, and it is a good operation, not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to ensure accuracy, and that is to form the eyelid like a mint leaf on top, and then lift the eyelid by three nails, separating and gathering them according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, use nails instead. If that is not feasible, take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the shape, then place another hair near the greater lacrimal, and one after the lesser lacrimal, adjusting them between your fingers for equality, then lift your hand as high as you can lift equal things, lifting the entire chain over which the treatment is given, as we have instructed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both lips of the wound for stitches, and treat what should be healed internally.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if you encounter an abscess, your operation or incision should be made, and treat that abscess with bandages and make it look alike, using ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes the eyelid may require that its hairs be converted, then take care to use in that what we have instructed about incisions; more stitches are better for others, as they are more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Surgery on canals is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And this is to convert the eyelid and divide the inner figure as I recounted; then, by artistry, make two canals or two fine threads of which their length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their breadth should be akin to the width of the incision.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the extremities of each division, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And then add whatever is subtle under what exceeds from the eyelid of the patient, and strengthen the threads for each division by making them very tight. Leave that for a few days; when the chain due to tightness will wither and be denied entry so that it will fall in on itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it's delayed, then break off the threads at the corners, and treat the wound internally until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it is hardened, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is how you should make two canals as instructed in this manner:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Concerning the elevation of prickly hairs on the body when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural hairs, hard and rough, prickly on the body, then in this operation for you take a delicate needle and place it at that point of the fine thread and the lion's beard, and carefully adjust both ends of it without breaking them.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be as much as a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you make another fine thread from yours for quickly, and if you want, use the ends of that one as well.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in your position, and be close to the sun so that your work may be proclaimed, for it is a subtle and detailed operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the adjusted hair that requires skill, and make it penetrate through the eyelid carefully until you remove that from the hard hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair inwards and insert that one inside, and have the hairs be one or two or three but no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand towards that inside where the hair has been pulled out from the eyelid in the hard hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	And if it's pulled out straight and the hair isn't pulled, pull it straight towards each division with the thread you have made for that one inside. Inside which the straight pulled hair will be.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And release that to the patient's sight, where then you will pull out straight and the thread, and trim all the hairs and shape the body, leaving the scar for two or three days, during which the hair will adhere to its place and grow over it good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is longer than usual, then adjust a long hair from the natural ones, and elevate it towards that or leave it so that it grows about some space further, then you will elevate that one.
Capitol .xiii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Regarding the treatment of trachoma which manifests above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it comes to trachoma, which appears above the eyelid when the eyelid is contracted in its place, either to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of pus, section, or cautery, it is called leporine, and this trachoma can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of pus, sections, or cauteries, or resembling their maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation on you is that you will cut through this consolidation and separate your folds, and place between them a strip of linen cloth, and bind those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use the healing of your conditions which dry up and constrict; if you do this, it will return trachoma pus bad that had not been there before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that soften thus as fennel, and soak them in the water where your legs are raised and mixed with it or apply tallow grease, which should be liquefied with a little oil, then immerse that cloth in it and heal with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your healing is that you puncture through all organs that are not consolidated according to the shape it had at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but some rectification of trachoma that does not return the shape of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Regarding the treatment of trachoma, which occurs on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This trachoma which occurs on the eyelid, it is called instantly-trachoma and some of it is natural, others are accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental trachoma is caused by pus, a cut, cautery or other similar conditions.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation for this is that you take a needle with a double thread and fix it in the flesh. You should then make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right one, so that the thread reaches both ends of the tissue.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the tissue to the sides on the needle and hold the needle with your hand, and cut through the wide opening.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if it returns the shape of the eyelid as expected, then it's good; otherwise, take the thread and place that on the cut opening, and with that reshape the eyelid, and make both cuts in the corner of the left eye.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two cuts be at two corners of the incision you've made between them, and make an angle with that so when they come together, it will form their shape.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this shape is the Greek letter: the omega.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then hold that amount of tissue there which is at the corner of your left eye, so that it secures the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust those separated parts and stitch them with the thread of wool; and heal those using the medicines that soften and the ointments in which they are to be healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if trachoma is caused by a cut or suturing or cautery, then it means you should make an incision on the flat plane of the eyelid as described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the ointment between the two folds as we said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the overall discussion of treating trachoma which occurs on the eyes or at the corners, it should be carried out in your operation, according to how trachoma is prepared from the shape of trachoma, and that one comes in various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And skilled artisans always prepare organs in every possible way that can fit within them so that it returns the figure to its natural form, or close to that form, and the patient according to what suits him from the operation and the tools in their most appropriate positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Regarding the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many people it means that the eyelid is solidly placed above the white of the eye, and prevents ease of movement and its natural actions. So it's known that you should intervene with your hand on the left side of the eyelid, lift it there or extend it to the eyebrow.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine incision that is not at the sharpness of the cuts, having it somewhat blunt so the patient does not get disturbed by the operation, and keep the incision from weakening the eye's sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your cut should remove that adhesion in a convenient manner so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the whole adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put salt water in your eye, or distill it from juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with an ointment from your body, and place over the eye wool infused in egg white, and regularly use causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Regarding the cutting of the nose and the elevation of flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nose can be cut in two ways; either nervously, which resembles a hard fine bone; or non-nervously, resembling whitish condensed moisture, which when touched, tends to take hold of the nostril and is removed without being left inside.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these areas do not start from the larger tear duct, where it grows little by little covering the view and prohibiting light and motion of sight.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of acting in the treatment of the patient is such that the sufferer places their head in their usual position, then opens their eyes, and raises their eyelid with your hand, then collect their tongue at the tip of their palate and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a thorn and insert it into a hair from a horse or a ox or a calf, or any similar thing, or make the tip of the thorn gradually longer, place that in the middle of the tongue, and penetrate that with the needle, and hold onto it with your finger; and extend this to the upper parts, scrape off the skin at the edge of the tongue which seals the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus continue following that under the hair until you reach the backside of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you puncture the remainder in the root of the tear duct at a subtle spot or at small slashes, and remove the flesh of the tear duct naturally, so that with this incision there is no continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the tongue at the heel or under the nail, as we have said, and then scrape it off at the groove which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal membrane on the groove, and that it does not result in a rupture, and that the pupil is not punctured.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And at the incision place a little of salt water or vinegar solution on it, and leave that in until another day; and then care for that with anything that covers until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the tongue is not nerve and you cannot insert the needle, or it is fixed in that place under the heel, then this type of tongue is treated with medicines, and heals just like I have recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then open the groove of the patient and take out a subtle groove like this with sharpened scissors according to this shape:
am subtilitat.	With subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you notice that it is thinning and becoming mixed in that groove, then distill from your mouth into the vinegar made from vinegar or from rose water or from salted water, and pour the groove inside until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then continue the operation until all of what is yours has been removed, otherwise it will leave a boil under the groove, and then you leave that, and care for the boil so that it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The inflammation of the tear duct flesh, if noticed in the groove due to great injury, should be suspended under the heel; and make an incision from that point onwards, and do not finish the operation so as not to cause continuous tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then continue by distilling vinegar on the tear duct groove until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Regarding the incision of the nostril and what is born from flesh that is adjusted in the groove.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some grooves in the nostril grooves are born of reddened flesh, and it is over-extended covering the pupil, or brings it close to or strengthens the eyelids and presses them towards the outer parts and is assembled like rubbing against the moustache.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation for this is such that the patient places their head in its usual position; and then opens the nostril groove of it and collects all that flesh with convenient hairpins or tweezers; and then makes an incision from where you begin until everything is finished at the clippers, and beware not to let go of that which you should do your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision at which you make these or at the groove that we recommended in the operation of the tongue, or with small slits where they are collected by rabbits according to how their form approaches this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your operation is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the groove with salt water, or distill on it vinegar powder and substances similar to those of corrosive medicines, and place over the groove towards outside a slice of egg white until you ensure the absence of boil pus.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of nosebleed and it becomes stopped with blood clot, and you fear boil pus, then leave the groove and care for that boil with water that dissolves that boil, and then continue your operation on it until it heals, and similarly do to the flesh which happens in this groove.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But remember that you should cover all healing of the groove with vinegar through natural or through accidental means, act by force, and do not put your hand into any of these operations while you see that that member is undergoing this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Regarding the collection in the groove.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sabo is a kind of vein that is stubborn in the groove and prevents its operation, it thins out the groove over days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the groove where there is sabo is strong and in this area there is no other illness besides sabo, then you collect that sabo.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your discretion; and let that ounce be of subtle duplication as per this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two ounces gradually within a body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and cleanse the wound little by little, as you see those veins become swollen with heat and turn red.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And remember not to let the heat reach to the extremities of the thigh; and if your operation is in midday towards the sun, and you are firm in your operation, do not penetrate any further than those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then in the wound you distil oil of wormwood or rue so that its acuity erodes what has become swollen from the knife.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all in that hour, then cover the entire area where there is pain from them, and let them rest for a few days until their pain is relieved and the wound has healed.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then continue to work on them according to your mother's teaching until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of sickle blades:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol Nineteen.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Regarding reduction of nasal deformities.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat deformities of the nose with a cautery or with hot medicinal applications following their description and if they are not healed, then it is not enough in them; rather, you should wait for the maturity of pus, and extract all the moisture that is within them until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the bone has been exposed and there's corruption or darkness within it, then you should treat them with an incision of this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a hard cap, and it should be made of iron indigo, and make the cap slightly rounded as if you were to press with a finger that is punctured by the point of a saw or finely ground (as seen in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that over the corrupted area of the bone and gently rotate it with your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is flattened.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let it be applied with some passes, and then restore the area against drying causes and tightening forces.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and there's good flesh in it, and if the scar tissue is removed and healed for forty days, and it isn't renewed or doesn't leave a wound, then you will know that it has been healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then it is not in its place but reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you would uncover from bone or with acute medicine, once the bone has been exposed, then you take it apart according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The extremity of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft of it should primarily thin out towards the extremity as shown.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that over the bone and let it be near to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little in the wound, and rotate your hand towards this area so that it penetrates all of the bone, and the patient feels the touch as they find an exit path when you feel their hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the area with tightening medicines, drying them as they should be taken.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and area have endured, then that substance which was expelled to different parts returns to the nose; thus this is minor pus over the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol Twenty.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Regarding reduction of the prominence of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose protrudes in its entirety and does not cause any damage or diminution, then bend the patient back and gently guide them, placing gentle incisions on their neck scarification and bleed well; then place liniment over the nose made of garlic and aloe vera and sesame oil, and reinforce the plaster placed on the nose with powdered dough.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method for the powders is that you take cloths of powdered dough and each cloth should be divided into four parts; make them from these powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those one upon the other according to the quantity needed by how much the nose needs it.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And reinforce over those with a tight bandage made of strong material; and apply the suction cups to their bleeding incision scars; and keep the suction cups in place and let the nose be straight during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If while the ligament is being softened, then you should make it very straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And hold the ligament tight both during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the nose has already been reduced, then that's good, but if not, then continue to apply plaster with powders and the bandage and suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol Twenty-One.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Regarding the excision of the prominence of the tunica uvea (the inner layer of the eyelid).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunica uvea and it protrudes outward like a slight swelling, and after this, let the edges of the eyelid form as if they were slightly raised, and you wish to incise them, then your operation on them should be as we have recommended: You would insert the spatula into the gap of the uvea at the site left from where it was done in the upper part, and insert another spatula at which there is a double thread from the lacrimal side, make that penetrate and guide the first spatula according to its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea around the spatula's path, and reinforce that with pressure.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the gallbladder, place it over the liver, soak it in egg white and let it cool before letting the thread pass through where it would fall under the fruit.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the liver with this so that it reinforces him once the disease is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some bandages are gathered from all the parts in a circle of cloth around the liver and adjusted to fit, a large one is sewn through a fine needle that goes towards the inside of the liver. Let the humid heat penetrate and descend the liver back into place.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of colic.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called colic is simply an ailment that settles in the liver like descending water, and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of acting on it is to have the patient lie down on the padded saddle and stretch out straight, then take hold of both ends of your hands on their knees and push them towards where you see the illness reaching into their parts, and make sure it dries up without descending further, and let the light in. The patient saw these things happening.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if it is not prepared for the descent of the illness to water, then have the patient lie between your hands and take a fine needle and place it on top over the neck skin cutting slightly into the conjunctiva towards the corneal epithelium in the corona (within where the disease exits), so that once the disease is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And once it's expelled, then you should distill in the liver water with a tail in which you have mixed honey or water into which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be treated for the other causes once it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water from the liver.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which one should be used for puncturing according to their declaration, this second type according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	And have the patient lie down on their back between your hands with their liver towards you, apply a strict motion.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand close to the liver of their eye, if the liver with water is the left liver; or with your right hand, if the liver is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take an almond, if the liver is on the left; or with your left hand, if the liver is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the crown for pregnancy of the eye in the white of the liver from the side of the tear duct, and then peel off the almond on its back and turn your hand towards it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the liver and you will feel that the almond has already been penetrated due to sight.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And guide the almond to the end of its journey through the channel as long as it is equal in size to the space which lies between the pupil and the end of the shadow, this is the crown of the liver; where you will see the liver's vision by the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond in the spot where there is water, and pull it down just one notch upwards from another, so if the water descends immediately, you will see the patient's liver above which they are seeing immediately, and the almond on their liver.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for just a little while; so if the water has descended, then you should stop that notch before the almond becomes stuck.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is stuck and does not descend, then you remove the almond with ease, turn your hand little by little towards it, and dissolve a small piece of clear salt from a gem in water; then wash the liver inside with that water; and then stop or cut off the liver using wet wool dipped in rose oil and egg white, then apply that to the liver.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And those are the ones from our time who rest on it like a comb immersed in egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not comply with your almond into the liver due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some people whose liver is hard - then have in mind that you should take the needle named almond, this being its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then puncture that conjunctive area, and do not let your hand end at the tendon, but rather make a path towards the point of the almond needle.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then guide the almond according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must conclude your work, have the patient lie down for a descent sleep made ready in which they rest on their back in a darkened room, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And allow the water to take its natural form for it to be clarified by its nature, and do not turn their head towards either side of the right or left.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the sweat follow its position within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that from this dark room and let them see the coldness clearly, and show him some causes, and then return the sweat by the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And don't do this when it's time for treatments or shortly after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	The water should be allowed to pass through this by itself, for fear of excessive or violent drainage.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess appears with a puncture, then you should open the wound in front of the eye for three days, and correct that amount as to where pus drains.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you must stop looking at the patient and place your hand over their mouth for which the patient's breath is regulated by this method for a few days, existing in the dark morning.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually take stock of that situation and discuss it regarding its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy, a disciple should not ignore some occurrences, and thus you should be fervent about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And already has been revealed to us some of those which belong to the Artach, and some say that in Al-Ayrac, you should make fire on a perforated board where water will drip.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen such perfect water in our land, nor is there authentic water in any of the ancient books; it may be that this water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices used for which one should use them on those, as to that which ignores those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of iron or properly steel, and their extremities at this subtle triangular extraction, the sharp end is also like that; that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Regarding the treatment of flesh, there's nothing to be done in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various kinds of flesh lumps, some cause that is assembled to the sign of Mars' weight or to a land disease; this illness is called a polyp which resembles that land representation.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of the patient's flesh it is crooked, flabby, of dark color; and of them there is flesh that is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these non-fraudulent and non-crooked flesh, you should make the patient sit between your servants and place them under the sun, and breathe into their nose, and pinch your finger on those lumps of flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract from those parts in front, and then ignite whatever you have understood from those among sharp, fine spits between one part where you know that the entire flesh is affected; if there is a cause of which cutting is possible in the patient, then cut it with one of these subtle tools inside so that it cuts off any cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If you are able to master or if a suppuration occurs with a puncture, then you stop doing that for the patient; or it is among malignant abscesses, then you touch and cauterize inside where the disease is removed and all cavities are affected.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And if you need to apply this in the nose close to the incision, add water or blood.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and there's moisture within the palate from it, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as the doctor says, then you know that inside the patient there is flesh in the pus under your nose which has not undergone cutting.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore you should make the patient swallow a piece of fat with which there is some lumpiness, use it in the meat juice, pause between each nut for the quantity mentioned or monthly, and make the patient sit and insert one end of the fat into their nose either by the ray or by another cause which might be possible for them.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this has been done, have them inhale their scent so that it reaches the canals of the nose, and let them sit on their pillow, for many children perform such actions by instinct in schoolyards, and it's a slight cause to those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause both ends of the fat stick, one end that sticks out over the nose and the other that sticks inside the nose, and apply bandaging to the meat that is in the fat stick, do this so that you know that the flesh is in the meat of the fat stick.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the fat stick, pause in the nose near the removal of pus with a spoon, and do this for three days or more until all that is rotten from the flesh heals.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And later at the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a lead tube for some days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you are dealing with treatment that dries out, use that method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the apparatus for nose purger where oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this of silver or iron which resembles a small opened lamp like a small basin, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of this apparatus for nose purger is flat, exposed; it has a handle at the back part of it, as when you immerse that into oil or what you want from the liquids and easily suctionable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	These nose purgers are valuable: prepare with castor oil, white camphor, ginger, and sandalwood, long pepper, mustard seed, and coriander. Mix with flour and water, make them into pills, take one pill with hot water, and put it inside the patient's nose pointing downwards.
Capitol .xxv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	The nosebleeds occur at the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Nosebleeds occur at the extremities of the nose, and if there is inflammation, it improves over a few days during which its cause needs to be examined.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason consider when the appearance of the patient begins, and clarify everything about it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place over the area or use a cautery or burning medicine where there is damage.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its development takes longer and it improves, then consider if it is infected, hard, dark-colored, and with little sensitivity; do not touch this one with iron as it is a pus sore; the symptoms that occur in this sore should be avoided due to their great mischief for him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the pus sore feels like a lion and is not dark-colored, and its development is possible everywhere in this area, then evacuate the patient and operate on this sign with fear, and treat the area with what dries and restricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Suture of the nose, lips and earlobe when continuity is dissolved by infection or by cuts.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you encounter solutions to continuity in one of these bones, there is little consideration for this operation rather than in some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then understand, when it comes to some cause of those, consider if there is an infection in his body, then adjust both edges of the infected area with sutures, and treat that until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the solution to continuity are already separated, and some is healthy, then understand that you should scrape off every part of his obvious body until there's no infection.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust both edges with sutures and strengthen them, sprinkle the infected area with dragon's pus, and apply trissat on it. Place a piece of alum plaster on the powder for one day or another of the consolidating plasters, and let it heal for two days or three. Then remove it and replace the plaster again until the scabs fall off by themselves, and treat with ointment until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method for suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles in this way as we have recommended in suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with wax in this manner and inform about it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Chapter 27: Removal of those causes that occur in the two lips in their parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Symptoms that occur when examining male patients in the inner parts of their lips include hard pus sores resembling fat from cattle, some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then understand that you should convert the lips and cavities of each of those hard lumps from all parts, and then fill the wound with sage trissat until the infection is reduced, and then wash it with warm water and treat the area with what dries, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Chapter 28: Suture of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Many symptoms arise over the adjusted flesh of the gums which the ancients called albus, therefore understand that you should suspend this one or whatever you have with this one on a nail, and when suturing it you should follow its own size, and let the healthy blood flow or the infection run.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place sage trissat or other drying powders on the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then sew it again, and cauterize it; the cautery will not return there.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Chapter 29: Reason for teeth being iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp, rough scarring appears on the surface of the teeth in their parts inside and at the corners, and some symptoms are dark-colored and occur citron or yellow within where they affect the gums, making it corrode this way causing the teeth to bleed.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Then understand that you should pinch the patient between your thumbs and place their head in this position, and remove the teeth where these scarring and similar causes appear, making sure no serious cause breaks them. Do this for the darkness and citron yellowness as well as others until they are modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if this is the same as during the beginning of bleeding, then it's fine; and if not, you should repeat this process on these to another day and to the second and the third until it reaches your desired statement about what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth require various forms of reorganization and shapes in different figures according to how you prepare for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, which reorganizes the tooth from its internal part is different from the one that reorganizes between the teeth according to other forms, and these types of reorganization tools should be prepared by you, which you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Chapter 30: On the removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you should cure the tooth from all pain until complete removal of it, which is not a cause that replaces the symptom when it is removed, which is sublimation where an abatement occurs in the removal of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is convinced that they must have their tooth removed, you must surely be certain which tooth is painful. Observe the spread of the pain under the patient's tongue and confirm where it falls upon a healthy tooth, then remove that tooth, and soon the pain ceases until the diseased tooth causing pain has been eradicated; this we have seen through surgical operation of barbies.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is painful, and how you know this well, then observe that when you incise in the circuit of the tooth at the gum line where there might be any anomaly, within that it dissolves from the tooth of the gums on every side, and closely hold those to your speech or with fine knives at the corner gradually, until that concludes.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And closely discuss with the patient's strength holding large gauzes for good communication or splinter shock, place your hands on the back of the patient so that you do not harm them, and carefully remove the tooth according to rectitude in manner, without piercing it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not yet removed, then take one of those instruments, and place your fingers on the patient from all parts with ease and effort in removing them as smoothly as possible, starting from the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	And if the tooth is extracted or corroded, then observe that you must cover it with a cloth and hold it at the subtle tip of your thumb to prevent it from being sucked during your compression over it while holding your fingers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And when you incise delicately at the scarification around the entire part of the gum and preserve your strength so that you do not pierce it and damage any part of him, return to the patient for the cunningness that is more than her first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And remember not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity during removal, as they don't administer what we have recommended; when observed under the skin come great ailments upon men that are more difficult than sucking out, and all of their swollen glands, or some of those, or that you remove from certain bones of the jaw, as we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after removing him, wash his mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if it needs to drain pus through the hole, like when observed leaking out, then add a quantity of honey and sprinkle it on the wound. If that honey doesn't heal, then cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs under which the tooth is held at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle and thick, so that they don't bend when you use those.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let them be as thick handled so that when you stretch them with those, they don't bend, their ends being short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of iron from India, with straight ends, and the ends of those should have teeth from which one can insert into the others by bending down forcefully, and some of their ends are the shape of a bird's beak that is called stork, so it's sturdy, and they have strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Title XXI
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and extraction of jaw bones that are sucked out.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is sucked out by some cause, then observe that you should place your fingers on the spot about the gum for a day or for two until that place is softened; and then insert or hold the ends of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called stork or glove, in the form of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be made as inside as a rasp or an axe.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not adhere to this advice with these forceps or tongs, then observe that you dig into the gland and remove all the flesh, and insert the tool which is called an awl, it being a small lever of which the shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it have a short extremity thick on one end and not be bent so that it doesn't get sucked.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the gland is already opened by this, it's good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments which have these forms: the form of the first tool is triangular at the end in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it be triangular and have a more delicate extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already help yourself with this tool having two ramps as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And also with other tools which precede in the cleaning of teeth; when youth is made with this tool which resembles a large wolf, and it has this shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular bent or short extremity, which is some thickness, and not bent so that it doesn't get sucked.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the tools for cleaning teeth are similar to other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The artisans are wise and subtle in their craft, finding for themselves according to what it means to them the operation and various ailments; for the ailments to which the ancients would neither describe nor use proper instruments, due to their varied forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is sucked out the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth, then place your weight on that at its location with what suits him for the tools and forceps which we have said about removing glands from teeth, help yourself with this gesture:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any lump, it should be treated gradually, and bound around the mouth so that it doesn't escape or the scent doesn't enter before the hole in the bone is fully opened; then return to its place with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small boil in the bone, then remove that from its surrounding area and its blackness, and treat it internally until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural course and in that form they are stuck, especially more so when it affects women, and even more for the most distinguished elderly ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth is in no way attached to another tooth, and there's no possibility of extraction or application of a salve on it, then that tooth needs to be extracted. However, if it is not connected to another tooth, then you should incise that with an instrument whose form resembles this; it looks like the cutting of pork, made from Indian iron having extremely sharp edges.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision on the area where you would cut that tooth for too many days due to its hardness of the tooth, and make sure it doesn't resemble another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it's an extracted prominent tooth as sharp as a file, then file that with a file made of Indian iron having this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	It is all made of Indian iron and the groove is sharpened just like when you file with a tool that has needles on it. It should be used in the form of small cuts over soft days for ease, so that no other tooth becomes similar or breaks off.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And at the end carve it gradually, and shave it with a small razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it's a tooth where one part is broken and touches the tongue, then consider that you should file that in the area where the roughness of that fraction is smoothed and leveled, and ensure it is filled so that the tongue doesn't hurt nor does speech become impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On restoring teeth that are lost in the gum using gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are lost due to impact or blow, and the patient cannot bear on what they eat, and you have treated that with stomatic medicines, but your treatment was not effective, then considering it's necessary not to allow them to fall into those that are lost in the gum of gold and not silver, for silver tends to turn green, and you can leave it there for a few days, whereas gold does not change color under any circumstances.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the gum have such subtlety and thickness according to how much could possibly enter between the teeth; regarding the shape of the implantation you should take the gum and place twice as much as that between two healthy teeth, and so that it grows with the double curvature of the gum between two lost parts, whether one or multiple, until it reaches the thread to the healthy tooth of the remaining part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And repeat this insertion into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge so that it doesn't become lost.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when you tighten the thread with which you hold the gum, make sure that there is no escape for it.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then with the forceps or remove them all, place those in every position during the operation, and hide those as well between the healthy tooth and the lost tooth, so that it doesn't cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then flatten that inserted like a Roman would.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it's slipped or broken, strengthen that or those with another gum in such a manner throughout its entire period.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of restoring two healthy teeth and two lost ones, like this as many times as these are used:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return one or two teeth back in their respective places and they grow as we've recounted, and that they regain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do this only a skilled artisan and wise person should.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it's appropriate to use a cause of cow bones, and made from them as the form of a tooth, placed in the location where a tooth fails, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the lymph that appears in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This lymph that appears leaving the tongue in some cases or is natural which humans are born with, or accidentally occurs due to a wound that has already become established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on you is that you open the mouth of the patient, locate its original position there; and elevate their tongue, then incise that lymph along with nerves according to the width where the tongue has been freed from its recent location.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or clotting in that area, and it has become established due to the healing of the wound, then you cut out an incision across the width where you have incised the lymph, so that the clotting dissolves.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that a crack is not made in the edge of the flesh and that you cut here so that pus can drain.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And afterwards wash the remnants of the incision with hot water or add vinegar or scrub with water; and then have the patient rest their tongue in this position for every night so that it does not become established as another clotting.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there occurs a flow of gall, place over the location where it is emitted; but if the gall escapes, then cauterize the location with an irritating cautery which you apply to that area.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And that cure addresses other causes within so that they may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a boil, use your tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes blisters occur on your tongue, resembling small pustules that prevent the tongue from performing its natural function. And enlarge them until they fill up the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And in the operation, you open the patient's inner thigh sixty degrees towards the sun and consider the boil.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find it a dark color or black and hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that which is tender.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you place the needle inside, and cut that under a thin surface, and cut from all sides; and if gall comes out during your operation, then pause over its right side, which is the gall bladder, so as to restrain the gall.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And continue with your work until you have treated it according to its needs, after washing it with warm water and salt; and treat that according to the other treatment for it so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	For the extraction of boils on both ears and that which is nothing in the genital region, as well as other boils.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it comes to the genital region, they are glands that are gathered in this area, and sometimes they appear outside and are called the two ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, then you consider if the boil is hard, of dark color, with little sensation; then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of yellow color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of gall; before letting it rest so that it matures, and then either you drain that, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is thin, then that which must be considered to be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And for the operation on this patient, you consider whether before your operation, if the boil has rested under the cauterization or if it has diminished with some diminution; then have the patient stand in front of the sun, and the head be up to your left side, open his mouth, and the servant take between their hands his tongue, leaving it on an instrument made from a noble material which has this shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And make it of silver or gold, and let it be thin like a thorn.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press on that tongue and it shows the boil to you, and place your fingers on that area, then take the needle and make an incision there, and pull that outwards as much as you can from all directions.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Also, if you remove some cause of the tunics, then cut that with an instrument which has this shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is similar to forceps, but the extremities of it are curved so that the opening of each one of those faces in front of the other, sharp, made of iron and flattened.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not present for you, then cut that with the surface of it which has this shape: It is sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one side, then cut the other according to this method of incision, and afterwards apply the patient with rubbing water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it comes to the flow of gall, apply water from the decoction of hops or mistletoe leaves and resemble that among the causes that restrict, so as to restrain the flow of gall, and then treat that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes blisters occur in the genital region other boils besides those two ears, then cut them according to what I have said and told about cutting both surfaces equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with a boil which was native in her genital area, this boil had a dark color, little sensation, it had already clotted her genital area and the woman could barely breathe, she was also prohibited from eating and drinking water, she was already on the brink of death if not for one more day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the boil had swollen so much that it contained two garlic cloves between which they could pass through with their fingers.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And I cut it in the middle and left him with one of his needles, then pulled that out, and then pushed out most of its large portion, then I incised where I understood from the other side of the cut, and forced the patient's mouth open, pressed their tongue, and then placed the needle into that boil.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I removed a large part of it, and there flowed out only a little gall from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the genital region of that woman was completely restored, she started drinking water again and shortly after began eating food. So I did not stop cutting from that boil for a long time, and another boil formed in place of it, which continued to incise until that prolonged itself.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I open and cauterize the groin of the patient, then proceed to additional procedures; and afterwards I wander around, not knowing what God did with that part towards me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the beginning of the boil when it is infected.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When phlegm accumulates in the tonsil, and it is infected and extensive, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is at a point on your left side that is thick and round, then it is referred to as "a boil".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured with what we have discussed in the division, and you do not follow your treatment, and especially when there's a boil that has been cauterized already and subsided from you, if it becomes subtle, then consider that you need to make an incision where the new lump has formed circularly; and if it is along that length, and it bleeds, of a dark color or black, and is not in your hands, then you should prepare for making an incision here, because there's fear towards the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you do that according to the manner I've instructed regarding its whiteness and length, have the patient open their mouth and press their tongue with an instrument whose shape allows for it to rest on the new location in the mouth, then pull it down and make an incision using one of two instruments as described in the section about making incisions between two teeth.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not make an incision there but only the one that is adjusted to the natural termination of your addition; if you make it too far down, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision between two teeth, and treat it inside so that it heals.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by your incision, you should use skill in the cauterization procedure so that their fear does not continue. The method of cauterization here consists simply of water. You should hold the patient's mouth in place with your hand and gently press their tongue against the tool we've described, taking water from what is called the cauterization section and applying it to this area while making sure there is a living flame but not too thick or thin. Then fill the cavity of the instrument with this water:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the cavity of your incision be filled with medicine like that used in cauterization and place it on the patient's tongue so that they may saliva or gargle inside their mouth because of the intrinsic medicine, ensuring no unnecessary discomfort on the palate and preventing damage to them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And afterwards hold your hand over the medicine and squeeze it onto the uvula for about half an hour while you observe that it has turned black and been soothed by the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take hold of and wrap that around the end of the tongue, submerge the stick in medicine, insert the tongue into this channel so that the stick adheres to it within this tube. Do this several times until you get what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then leave it to dry out which should happen approximately three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that you need to repeat the medicine, do so, then for cauterization clean out the channel of the uvula with a moistened stick, modify it according to what's in this channel of your medicine. Wash it with water and further treat with ointment externally, clean it inside with a tongue scraper until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment saves from the incision and removes fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some healings are treated by the one that is made subtle with cauterization and incision, which heals through sub-inhalation in this manner: collect camomile, ivy, dog rose, mugwort, Arabic gum, chamomile, thyme, and similar substances from among herbs; adjust all these causes or some of them into a mixture, and let it be submerged in hot water, then boil. Let the mixture be strained into broth, and place an earthenware pipe on this mixture with its mouth up. Make it from silver or metal according to this manner.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And place the tip in the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the uvula on the tongue, while the uvula is somewhat obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And afterwards apply it to the healed spots while they are still moist, remember not to perform this treatment at the time of the boil's appearance as it might damage the boil excessively, and do not do what I've instructed but rather declare the need for cauterization regarding their boil.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If this tool is not available to you, then take a stick and apply a bundle of garlic at the tip of his mouth, so that the patient's mouth swells, for which the garlic prevents steam from burning their mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the removal of thorns and what adheres in the palate, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Healed spots adhere in the palate or thorns from plants, or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should remove what is apparent from those, on which you can see, for when you press the tongue against the tool in front of your soleil, then it will be made clear to you what is in the mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not present and hidden in the belly, seek to make the patient vomit before the food becomes digested in the stomach; thus, if the cause of this issue lies within the belly, the vomiting will force it out; or let the patient swallow a piece of bread, or a spoonful of raw lettuce juice or a handful of dry flour; or take a piece of sea sponge and bind it tightly with a bandage; then let the patient pass it through their mouth until they reach where the obstruction is, so that vomiting will occur from there.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and drink it with tightly bound lips, then place it inside your stomach gently and extract it; or take a spoon and gently put it in your mouth and carefully remove the obstruction.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If vomiting does not occur with those causes we've mentioned, then use this lead tool according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if the lump is large enough to pierce through a small hole, then at the tip of it place something that you will insert into their throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And have them raise their head upwards, and ensure that you do not touch the inside of their throat, in order to allow it to pass through their body and remove whatever is causing pain or discomfort from within the throat, or what the doctor removes with their hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Yet have the patient lie on their back with the stomach towards you, according to their knowledge of the location of the source of the issue and remove it downwards, then place your hand on the tool, doing everything as prepared within them until vomiting occurs.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol. XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Regarding the extraction of gallstones attached to the belly.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When gallbladder medicine has been prescribed as we have indicated in the division of treatment with medicines and not responded, consider doing this on the belly of the patient towards the sun, because you will understand their tongue with an instrument that we recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you remove the gallstone, extract it at a small size or in subtle stages.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it's not possible to extract it at that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the belly of the patient, and place near the concavity of the cannula a heated iron, and do this as many times (until the gallstone dies and leaves the stomach) and advise the patient to drink only water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a basin full of water and make the patient open their mouth with that, and wash their mouth with it; do not swallow any cause from that and let the water sit for an hour in your hand before the patient, as soon as they feel the water flow.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	And if vomiting does not occur with what we've recommended, then fumigate the patient with garlic or with asafetida using the tool that we recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and let it take its effect.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation in fumigation is as follows: take an earthenware bowl containing burning charcoal and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which there's a handle; place the tip of the tool inside this handle; then hold the bowl above the fumigation area; have the patient put their mouth at the tip of the cannula, close their mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation reaches the gallstone; as soon as it's in contact with the gallstone, it will start reacting.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't react, then repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and others, and don't drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the tool with which gallstones are removed from the belly when seen; it's similar to forceps like these, except if it has some curvature in it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is flat towards the belly, and the end of it resembles a flamingo's beak that is rounded, which when you grasp any substance, won't slip.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol. XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	This is the summary of the discourse regarding blisters and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Blisters are special spots, of bodily origins, according to the memory recall, from any in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are various in penetration and section of them by two methods, among which one is through the peculiarity of blisters themselves; and due to their absorbing moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is on the locations where they occur in the body, for blisters occurring in the head are different from those that occur in the anus; and the blister in the meaty location is different from the blister at the juncture; and each has its own way of operating.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some blisters are those which only need to be pierced after their healing progresses or completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other blisters are those which need to be pricked immediately upon crossing them and not wait for their completion as in the case of blisters close to joints; when a blister approaches a joint, prolong the being of it until you place what is inside it into its circuit, causing corruption of the fibers or nerves at that joint leading to contraction of that limb; or if a blister is near a main member and you delay piercing it until it matures, it will affect the main member; or if it's close to the anus, prick that unripe one; and don't pierce in an unevenly digested area but rather the one near the anus, so its passage doesn't get elongated within the parts inside the anus leading to a fistula formation; or if it's done at the end of the member which isn't healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time for the puncturing of the abscess, this is when it has ripened.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it has ripened when the pain and fever have subsided, and near the reduction of sweating and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know to puncture it at the spot of pus below the abscess and from the discharge of pus coming from the inflammation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Puncture promptly according to the length of the flesh or body, if abscesses are in parts of the muscles or feet, and on spots of lumps, along the cords of nerves, blood vessels; and, later, in all equal places where reflection does not occur; for those that reflect do so, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshly spot, then it's that you make the puncture within which digestion of it follows according to complement, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that point, it prolongs the duration of the disease and the hardness of the pus, and thickens its fluids.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Puncture such abscesses according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to which part the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And know that you should administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a large puncture or an incision with some pus collection according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of abscesses in which it is known that the opening should be brought back and be sewn up, when done so with bread and made in time that it already sticks, as happens in many cases of dubel and bubo.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are cut at a point having three corners; and of those it's done in the manner of a thorn figure, as with gout abscesses.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And among them are those where circular section and lunar section are administered, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And for that which cannot be handled as such as with superficial lion abscesses, know that you should puncture it at a superficial puncture, or just flatly so.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is thick and has already collected clean pus, puncture it and do not worry about removing all the pus at once; take out some part of it, then restitch the abscess by another day, then extract a larger part, and proceed to make pus discharges according to graduation until it's hole-drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And most importantly if the patient is of a green blood type, or female weakness, or small child, or old in decrepitude, for when the animal spirit pus is resolved with the discharge of clean, it weakens the suffering and thickens the patient, so you open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and your puncture where you are puncturing these abscesses, know that you clean the infections and consider hence whether the pus of the abscess is small or a flat section; then administer remedies or local remedies accordingly. And if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the puncture are pus-filled, then know that you should place stitches in each thread as they reach their time.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess is separated a part of the opening or has concaved that on the circuit, then know that you should complete it with old thread or make stitches from linen fabric as when you remove bandages or roots, consider humidity; strengthen it by the third day; and proceed with that and cure what covers the ointments until it's healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if it happens that you are bleeding with your surgical operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which you immerse a linen cloth, and place that over the area of blood pus discharges.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if bleeding persists, then know that you should administer remedies and treatment with the powders which I have recommended in locations of our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it's in winter time, and the location of the abscess is on a spot with nerves, then know that you should dust powders in vinegar and oil caut, and place those over the spots.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it's in summer, and the areas are fleshly, then know that you should apply powdered substances in water or oil, or with vinegar and oil, all of which should be rubbed until by the third day, as we have said, and then know that you should relieve the abscess and clean that and administer remedies for its treatment until it's healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary about the knowledge of abscess treatment universally, but according to the way of distinction that I have said for all abscesses in how their treatment proceeds through specific chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Concerning the section of abscesses which occur in the neck region.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck area small abscesses, they are of special lymph nodes which contain layers that form them; and the types of their pus.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And about their pustules, and those that contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And about those which contain moisture resembling dust, and resemble them; and about those which are hard, lumpy.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, just like with the extraction of those that do not involve constriction of blood vessels.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in this section is that you apply those with instruments of a shape that is somewhat like it, which are called prongs, so you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if it is moisture that causes it, then divide that in this section according to its length by sections superficially following this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start from the section of line .B. within the line of .G. Then, as the moisture is evacuated, then you excise that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it from all, so when checked you return, if from that there was any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian oil if there is any, or else in water and salt; fill that with the wound and let that stay inside for another day, so when you eat it away completely what remains from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly apply that Egyptian oil on it twice or as many times if needed, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then treat the wound with oil until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there are fatty nodes in an abscess, then you must cut open that area according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In this section with a cross-shaped form, cut into the two parts of the area's folds and extend it from every direction, and use your strength in extracting the membrane that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If there is any contradiction with this tool, then do as I first instructed you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, do this for the hardened abscess area and its treatment according to what we have told you; the area over a hardened abscess is lightly padded, since it has few scars and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these abscesses are in the head in certain men for whom it is not moisture; this cause is when I cut over an abscess on the head of an old woman and treated the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone that could not be squeezed, if another one was touched, it would cause a wound.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And in other abscesses incidents in the head like this are not the brain, as with the abscesses that come to the heads of children and you should consider the reasons for the earlobes, but the area of all these is superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause in making the incision at the lower part of each for that may relieve the body from parts that are lower.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those according to what is suitable for their healing process.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Section on the lymph nodes that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses are found in the neck and underarms, as well as on the elbows; others may occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Those are the ones that occur in the neck; they are lumps that develop within them, and all tuberculous disease of those is within their own membrane, just like in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The varieties of these lymph nodes are lumps, among which some are hard, and others contain moisture, and those that are malignant do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one you must have good disposition in the touch, whose color which is manifest corresponds to the color of the blood, and it affects all parts, and does not stick to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the sinew, and it is not a swelling when you cut open that in the dry superficial part of the body above the line of .G. between the lines of .B., and scorch it from every side, then extend the folds of the neck with one, or with several more if necessary, as we have said for abscesses on the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is better caution not to cut into the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the knife is not sharp enough to fit your hand during the cut or harms the patient, you should not make unnecessary cuts; so if you were to cut into a vein or artery and forbid yourself from continuing with your operation, then pause on the inflamed wound, use powders that keep the pus flowing, strengthen the wound, and leave it inside until the abscess's inflammation subsides and the wound softens and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is eliminated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	And return to your operation while you complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire about the things you have described for the other small lymph nodes, therefore cut those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the area of a large lymph node vein, then you should not cut that lymph node from its area.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before this, lay that on a thick board so that it will fall by itself when you remove the obstruction.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old leather which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, and treat that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut the entire lymph node, then proceed to adjust the two flaps of the wound so that there is neither a superfluous nor a remaining cause.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	And if you notice there is excess cause due to the size of the lymph node, then proceed to understand where to cut it, remove that and perform suture as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those with scrophula containing moisture, puncture that at the surface opening here where it appears in your patient's location of maturation, and make a puncture of that which is beneath their body pus, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And make a close incision, you must dress it and resemble those, so that the pus that is in the inflammation rots.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you turn the wound which has already healed, then you treat that with meat-generating ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the neck in a pustule occurring within the scrotum.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients dissected this section in the prepuce, and not seeing anyone in our land who has done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the report of those things.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And in men there is a corner, cover that the removal of the prepuce takes place without causing pain, because thus it is not done violently where all the veins and major blood vessels are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	And in those who have pustules in the mouth or scrotum or both ears, when the testicle is not in the canal, it's best to avoid the section of the prepuce and prevent the loss caused by puncture.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want this, I would make an incision in the prepuce with three circles of the prepuce's circles, or four on a smaller section by its width in that which is between two circles according to quantity, making the incision within the skin, not the cartilage. This location is suitable for the incision, being without flesh and the blood vessels from it are veins.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, it's best that he extend the scrotum line to the inner side, then make an opening in the membrane so that it reaches into the canal, but avoid blood vessels or veins like those anywhere.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And make the incision there as we have recommended; and it indicates on that part of the canal by the lump which is from that eruption in that which has burst out, and by the retraction of the swelling.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the opened wound heal for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is ripe for the feared puncture, add two layers of the membrane of the wound, and if that alone is bone.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And apply medicines that cause the flesh to regenerate until it heals.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And as for Al-Bucasis, the summary of our report is that some of these pustules have already opened the scrotum of the testicle, and the testicle has gone into death, and the body of him is decomposing. Some would incise the epiglottis so that he could breathe the testicle over the site of the wound for one breath, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, let the wound remain open until its malice is consumed; and the malice of it lasts three days; and then order thus the wound, and treat that until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen personally, is that a servant had a catel and spend months in her scrotum and made an incision on one part of the lung canal, and I was called to treat him, and he cried thus like those who die, and uncovered the wound and took up the blood which was seeping from the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So I was compelled to confess that it had not punctured a vein or artery, and the wind escapes from the wound, and treated that until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And nothing befalls the servant unless not even in veins, and some days return to his health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And I would say that there is no fear in the section of the prepuce.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section on pustule which occurs outside the scrotum, and is called the scrotal hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This pustule named scrotal hernia is a large pustule according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And there are two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need to treat it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways of which one is like fatty nodes, and the other way is like pustule which happens due to blockage of an artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not assume that it has been squeezed out with iron rather than in the smaller one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that and investigate it according to the description, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then make an incision on it as with nodes, and extract it from what contains it in the skin and fat; and otherwise, it's examined thoroughly of its nature, then treated that where it directs for treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the types of nodes, I have already described all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you should note this difference between node and exiture that may cause doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And I say that with exiture is heat, fever and violent pains within which the bubbling of excess ceases; and the process of putrefaction is completed when later fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May it be that there's neither heat nor fever nor pain, and consider that lion's tooth which is inside the stomach itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and the patient's appetite is like a fever, and this happens similarly to digestion, whether it is more or less, and there are two types according to that; some contain fat and retain moisture, and the colors of moisture are spots, as I explained in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of inflammation, remove it and examine it at the appetite for a substance which is called an introse, according to what comes to its form in the caput that is near this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method for examining abscesses and all types of nodes; you take this substance and introduce it into the pus-containing wet spot that you find in the abscess, and you will move your fingers into that little by little until you know that the substance has penetrated the chain.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And as you approach your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract that introse substance and consider what is situated in the remnant of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture is removed, regardless of its color, then you incise on the superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture left of that introse substance, then you will know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry on it as the incision has taken the form of a cross according to this manner:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As such as you have been taught, suspend it with strings, and scrape the skin from all sides with ease, and keep the membrane or sac, if possible, over that one and extract that health from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	May it be that if it is broken during the operation, it's not possible to extract that health, and spots observed inside must do so, then you will extract it piece by piece without causing any damage.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	That is, if it returns for some reason, either partially or completely, the node returns as before.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that some small part of it returns, then fill the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the spot that was an abscess, and treat this other way until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it's a large node, then you open both of its lips and treat that as what inflames.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May it be that if there is pulsatile pain, or not, then you cut and apply heat to the area of the boil that is under the skin, smoothing that stretch for two days or three until the wound heals, and stops the bubbling of the blood; and then return to incise that which has been broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol Chapter XLVI
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Regarding the necessary forms of the substance in section and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Among those are the forms of the introse substances, and they are of three kinds, which among them is large, and from those it's intermediate, and from those it's small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introse is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of an intermediate introse is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small introse is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Let them be made with iron, in alchemical substances, from the ends of fallen limbs appropriately, so as to stimulate the internal substance in abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named differently, one of which is called blood.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	They are of three kinds; some of them are large, intermediate, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experiment has the form of this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the intermediate experiment has the form of this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experiment has the form of this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is necessary that they pass through those abscesses, exits, and fistulas, and boils so that within them are from the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They are round forms, large ones, lions, like large needles where the thorns stick to them, and they are made of iron, or of brass, or of silver; and the best are when they are made of citrine iron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are experiments of black feathers which you remember to have opened those fistulas in the cavity where reflections reside, that those reflections are reflected on their lightness towards those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	They are of three kinds; some of them are long, and of the others intermediate, and of the others short, according to the quantity of thickness of the fistula and the constriction thereof.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large lead experiment:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the intermediate lead experiment:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small lead experiment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the strings are of special spots; some of them are simple ones, which have only a curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and intermediate.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from those come threads, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those come threads with two curves, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them come threads with three curves, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a single large thread is this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of an intermediate single thread is this:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple thread has the form of this:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Method of treatment for gout:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Method for treating gout that affects mid-foot, method of its treatment:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Method for treating gout in the little toe, method of its treatment:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Method for treating gout in a large joint with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Method for treating gout in the middle joint with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Method for treating gout in the little toe with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Method for treating gout in a large joint with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Method for treating gout in the middle joint with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Method for treating gout in the little toe with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels by which they cut and pierce the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds of them, where among those one is large, middle-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those (scalpels) on which sections are made are sharp, and the other ends are not sharp. They are not used in such a manner, but rather so that during the scraping of nodes there is no risk of cutting into a vein or nerve, and for those treatments to benefit the patient and bring them tranquility. A small part through this adjustment brings about the excision of abscesses.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of lancets; there are three kinds: large, middle-sized, and small, just like arrows.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large thimble:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium thimble:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small thimble:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of ivory and resemble reeds, on which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the end piece there's a perforation on the hidden surface and within that hole you can reach both inside and outside, as you wish, just like what you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas that you hide between your fingers should be used to pierce abscesses and not allow the patients to feel their discomfort. There are three kinds of them: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms for suction cups which reduce the flow in diseases, there are three types: large, medium-sized, and small; these are their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citric ivory, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these types of suction cups: large, medium-sized, and small, for when you need to quickly remove the flow from disease. Otherwise, when medicine is first applied, it doesn't happen this way.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to expel blood everywhere in the body; instead, use them only on fatty areas. Such as on the knuckles and thighs, and on the elbows, breasts, belly, testicles, and similarly on fatty moist lumps.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some operations are performed with those tools or small objects resembling pins according to this shape; when done through phlebotomy, the blood is removed, or if you need to cut a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some operations are performed in a circular manner according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47:
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts which are made by women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some operations cause the men's breasts to swell up like those of certain men when they begin to become fatty. And then the breasts swell and are assembled like women's breasts, and we should use a small amount of remedies far away from them.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who apply this, know that you should cut the lunar section according to this shape, from line B to line G. Then scrape off all roughness and fill in the entire wound with ointment medicine, adjust both edges of the wound for stitching, and treat it inside so that it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast sinks to the sides and becomes softened due to its size like in women, then it should be split into two halves containing pus, each with a cut resembling a lunar figure. Each part should contain the other half of each segment so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form between lines B and G. Then scrape off the redness which is between the edges of the wound, remove the swelling, and apply as previously mentioned about stitching and powders until it heals inside.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the cutting of what needs to be cut due to anxiety from the patient and bleeding, then you should fill the wound with corrosive ointment and treat it inside so that this corrodes the fatty tissue, and afterwards heal it once it has been treated.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48:
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the piercing of abscesses that appear under the nipples.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The abscesses that appear under the nipples are of the species of scrofula, thorns, which contain a skin that is pus-filled.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those that contain moisture; these ones with moisture should be cut according to this shape: from line G. to line B. And when all the pus in the abscess has been removed, then fill it with a paste and treat it on the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then keep the wound clean with a suitable ointment for a while until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess from the glands or from the catguts is present, then you cut in that place as we have said in the section about catguts for equal treatment.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is spreading to an area that causes secondary infection, then apply the cautery according to what we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on abscesses that occur due to cutting or through veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the cut is ruptured and the coagulum (clot) above that place causes an abscess, then pus accumulates forming an abscess. The symptoms to identify whether the abscess or inflammation is due to an artery or a vein include: when an abscess caused by an artery extends throughout the body; and when you press on the abscess at your fingertips, you feel a rasp sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein shows up more clearly in the symptoms of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And this section is about that abscess, especially when it comes to the symptoms, and in anginas, and in the throat, and in fixed body parts; and it's a large one, so iron treatment should be avoided until its cure. And in those at the extremities, or at the head, then iron intake should be avoided as well.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	About the one that is due to inflammation of the opening of the cut, split in the coagulum section longitudinally; and then ligate the section with strings and close to the cut, and remove from the tunics where it's exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then proceed with that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, strengthen the cut with iron at two points, - which causes you to feel your strength in the removal of two cuts which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then prick that spot which is between two ligaments under the skin until you can release the whole infection, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with the treatment under which they are formed to fall into the ligaments; and continue with the care using suitable ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it's an abscess due to a vein section, you should use your hand like this that is near the point of the abscess in the skin and then insert the needle at the spot where you had placed your hand earlier with your finger. Then make it penetrate; and inside that thread double, as I have told you when using two threads on both ends of the thread at the ends of the ligament.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that you will cut the thread, then insert iron into that needle so that all the abscess from the first needle is in it. And strengthen your iron at four points.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then dry the abscess in the middle of it until when you sit like this with it, then cut off the excess skin from it, and leave what is tied to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the powder which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and continue with the treatment that is done with warm water and ointments until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter LX of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just like an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when they are injured during percussion or due to excessive manipulation, respectively.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the way it affects is in the places of the supporters or at the heel, or everywhere where the joints swell up.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And this is a heavy abscess, and its color resembles another body's, and it occurs in the larger parts of its disposition beds; when you strengthen it with vehemence, feel in it the thigh-like stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it's not an abscess that extends throughout the body; instead, there's a release of blood and swelling occurs everywhere, it doesn't go forward or backward to any parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So with those that are in the joints, you should not harden them with iron, as it will lead to a contraction force.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And this applies when it's in the head or forehead and releases blood under the skin.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	And if it's a small abscess, then take it from the edges and cut off that root part.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it's large, then support it with a string and scratch that area, then hold it in place. Adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Section on the abscess that occurs from a cold affecting the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Notice the symptoms found in the stomachs of those individuals and other parts of the body that are called fungal in similarity to fungi, from which the cause is subtle, its head is large; already the lips of these are discussed, it's from those that are small, and it's from those that have greatly increased.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one case, in which there were two parts in the stomach that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of subtle origin.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of these were turned inside out and would split open, with moisture flowing from them continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I inserted those and looked into it within a part of eighteen inches on each side. And the other has seen one.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation at the beginning of their disease, if you consider that the patient is wet and the color of his skin is white, wet, due to subtle sweat; then you will cut with a long incision, and be present as you apply heat on your location, the area where you should remove the sweat, which should be treated with a cautery in fire. If you see the sweat, apply the cautery there.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see that the patient is fearful and anxious, avoid cutting with iron. Instead, take freshly melted lead, strengthen that part of his skin, which works in the way we have described; leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And adjust closely in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large amount of lead within it until it is separated and falls on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If that part is due to abundant sweat, then there is often a cause of fear and anxiety in it, and especially in the case where it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It's possible that you separate his sweat, and then apply heat to that area so that it doesn't return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And treat that area while the wound is healing.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And remember not to assume that you should cut any part that is of a dark color, with little sensation, under careful observation, for such areas may contain cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come back to remind you about this shortly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of the navel prominence.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Navel prominence is caused by various reasons; either due to cracks in the belly which is above the stomach and causes leakage of liquid or intestines according to what happens in other ruptures; or because of a disease that causes fluid to leak from veins or arteries as previously mentioned, or due to constricted wind (possibly referring to air flow) within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	It might be due to cracks in the belly and due to leakage from the membrane, then the color of the pus is similar to the body's color; it has varying pain intensity and appears at various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its location corresponds with what we have recounted earlier, with varying intensity. As you press on that area with your fingers, it becomes concealed, and then returns; it feels soft under your touch, and there is a significant effort needed during insertion, and vigorous work must be done.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	It's due to wetness if it is visible and not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or bulges.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it's due to an infection, then these symptoms will appear on the pus turning black and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	It might be due to nothing in the flesh (possibly meaning some sort of lump), then the pus is heavy, large, and hard, and feels like a lump according to the quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	It might be due to wind (possibly referring to air or internal movement), then touching it is sensitive.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And in the operation for this, you should consider whether the navel prominence is due to arterial or venous disease, or wind; hence, you should refrain from treating it because there might be fear and anxiety associated with it as we have taught earlier when discussing pus due to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the navel prominence is due to an intestine or membrane issue, then you should command the patient to lie down straight. Additionally, feel around the entire area of the navel, and command that they place their hands against your palms on their stomachs, so as not to obstruct the movement of the intestines. Then circle with a long incision along the circuit of the navel in relation to the point you felt. Extend the pus mass upwards to about half the body, then lie down on the circuit using strong or soft lead, and the method of applying lead should be gradual.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then, with the spatula extended over the navel and your fingers inserted into that spot, you try to retrieve the intestine. If it is caught or hidden by the membrane, then you quickly remove it and push the intestine back inside the abdomen compartments.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have retrieved the membrane, then take that with a spatula; and cut off the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that area and proceed with your operation. Take two needles and insert them into those two strong points, and place the needles in the circuit you created around the pus mass in a cross-like manner, making sure they penetrate. Strengthen the pus mass into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles in place so that when the flesh is extended, it falls by itself; or cut that once it becomes thinner and settles, then proceed to cure it with what you apply between when it's healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the navel prominence is due to nothing in the flesh or due to wetness in it, then you should drain the pus as we have said and remove the infection or wetness found within it. Then proceed to cure that with what you apply so that it heals the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of children.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already discussed, in the division, of different types of children's ailments and how they are treated with medicines, that healing without causing harm or ulceration is sought for them; we have also mentioned that diseases of children can be generated from the carelessness and oversight during their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And it was said by the ancients that some childhood diseases are in locations where their eradication is possible, such as within the brain which can be found in the breasts or on the thighs and similarly distributed throughout the body to remove everything there, especially when they start small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it becomes old and intense, don't try to touch them, I cannot cure any of that for you, nor have I seen another, nor has it reached this.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for you is as we have said when it is distributed in this way, you proceed and leave the patient and purge them of black bile some diseases, then target that, if it is inflamed visibly fills the cavity.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient with preparation in which the operation is located, and proceed with cautery on those that approach that; and make a concave from all sides to ensure good excision without leaving any cause of the reasons for you.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the treatment flow, and don't abscess it lightly, and press on the areas, and remove any pus in full with your hand or with an instrument of which is within reach among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if it causes an opposition of large pus in the flow of vein or artery, then cauterize that within where the pus flow has ceased, and proceed to treat that among the other treatments where it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	"Capitol. Liv." typically refers to a historical Roman structure which served as an administrative center, but without context in this passage, it seems out of place or perhaps incorrectly translated or referenced. If "Capitol" refers to the city, and "Liv" is intended to mean "Life", it might suggest that the text focuses on medical knowledge related to life-saving measures, particularly surgical practices for treating injuries resulting from violence, as indicated by references to wounds inflicted by swords and arrows. However, without more information or context about the translation process or the specific language being used here, a precise interpretation of this phrase is challenging. The original text seems to be discussing various medical procedures including gout treatment, foot surgery, hernia management, patient positioning during procedures, and methods for purging black bile, which are all related to healthcare practices rather than directly linked to "Capitol" or "Liv".
De curacio de ydropici.	Regarding the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division of the species of dropsy from water, and the signs for each type, regarding their treatment we use medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is merely the species of splinters alone, and it does not approach to iron in species of tympanic or in species of syphilitic dropsy, which one is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of dropsy due to ear maladies with medicines and your treatment does not work, consider that if the patient has already become debilitated or if it's a different ailment another type of dropsy, as in their cough or belly and similar conditions, then be careful not to medicate them with iron, for fear is on this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you find the patient with excess vigor and it is not another disease but dropsy alone in them, neither young nor old, then the method of operating on them is that you lift the patient between your hands, then minister to them by pressing their belly with your hand, expel the water from their body at this point opposite the navel. Take a thorn-shaped tool according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two parts long and sharp at the tip like a thorn; however, it should be as short as possible gradually in your case, so that during the operation you do not enter into the intestine and that you do not touch it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from within the intestines, in which case you have to look for the section that is three finger-widths away from the navel towards the sides on his right above the belly button.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the cause of dropsy is due to a disease in the stomach, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three finger widths.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the cause of the illness is due to bile, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And don't let your area be over the rib where the patient wants to relieve themselves so that excesses do not flow towards that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then puncture the entire length of the tool through that segment, and insert it into that section. Raise your hand with the spike between the skin and the wound; you should scrape that area off. And if the amount is as long as a finger or slightly more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the siphon so that the spike reaches the place desired, it is the location of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then remove that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a fine silver catheter; it's made of silver or ivory or bone. In the lowest part of its body there is a small tube, and on its sides are three needles: two from one side and one from another side; its tip is cut in such a manner like a feather, as you would see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it there is a larger loop, which when the instrument reaches water, that immediately presses against the instrument, therefore evacuates out water in moderate quantities, if you evacuate too much from it before this, it weakens the patient by resolving their spirit animal or leads them to fainting as death is approaching.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Remove from that according to the quantity of virtue in him and according to what you understand from the position of the patient's body related to the nature of his virtue and the goodness in him.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and heat the water which causes this to be often retained by the obstruction that holds it up on his intestines, where you have noted that you should pierce it according to that method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then apply the instrument to the other day if you find that the patient tolerates this, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to let any of the water evaporate rather than a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then treat that as if it were burial in sand, sweat baths in the river, and exposure to the sun for long periods; and treat that with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and cleanse close to the water extraction site, according to what I have recounted in that which was preceded.
Capitol .lv.	The text seems incomplete or possibly contains a typographical error as "Capitol .lv." doesn't translate into understandable English content. It might be referring to 'capitulum' (chapter) if it's part of an old document, but without context, it's hard to provide an accurate translation or interpretation.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary tract obstructions.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are expelled from their mother's womb, and the tip of their mixture (or umbilical cord) is not perforated (or it is stretched or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then there should be a percutaneous puncture as soon as it is born with a fine needle according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place in the umbilical cord a small lead wire and bind it there, and hold for three days or until it drops.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him urine; and then return that (referring to the umbilical area).
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not close this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Let that in which the umbilical cord is stretched be treated with a lead wire as we have said, for too many days until it becomes widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Let those in which the umbilical cord is not in its proper place be left alone, this causes this of them, that which was born with an umbilical cord should pass through the end of the head of the penis so that he cannot urinate in the parts inside; and it does not affect his generation, according to his sperms do not reach the mother correctly, and is a malformation stuck.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation in him is that the patient should be on his back and you extend the tip of his penis with your left hand with strong extraction, and cut the head of the penis's tip at the opening in the suture point, like cutting a feather, or without cutting any part, so that the middle section of his foreskin resembles the tip of the penis and that the umbilical cord falls into the middle point according to how you do it.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation for blood flow, what marks happen when you do this; and pause him at this where you cut off the cord, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capítulo 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Regarding the albata that occurs in the foreskin at the tip of the penis and congestion, darkening, and adhesion of the foreskin at the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Marks are seen in this albata on the skin, it is an indication of stuck flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, do it by suspending with a delicate string and remove that until the entire albata is gone; and then rest on that place dipped in Egyptian oil; and then there, treat with oil until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the albata is malignant, look at its color, then you should apply cauterization near its cut and its length.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Let it be if the albata is on the foreskin of the tip of the penis in uncircumcised people, and one part of the albata is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside; then let it be that you remove the albata which is inside until it consolidates; and then you treat the outside, when you treat this period, it is not guaranteed that it will not become inflamed.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And just as it happens in the testicles and on the foreskin, turning black and being corroded, then let it be that you remove everything that has already degraded and that is about to corrupt or that has already been corrupted; and draw a line over that area with honey, which gets treated with flour made from rye and poppy seeds and crushed sesame.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Let it be if there's blood discharge, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	And the juvenile cauterization is in two positions at once, it's for blood discharge and when the wound gets corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the tip of the penis is corroded and gets completely destroyed at that time, then you should insert a lead catheter into the middle of the foreskin so that the patient urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce, there is the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in the case where the prepuce is retracted, and on him circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to disease or abscess), you must cut with a blunt blade until the tissue dissolves and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove them with great care, then proceed by cutting with the edge of your blade around the cause of the penis head and prepuce, and so when the prepuce, which is delicate, is easily torn through its delicacy, it is just a slight piercing.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the prepuce from the penis head by a line of its delicacy, which has already been rubbed with water so that it does not adhere to another substance.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And later treat with astringent ointment until it hardens.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Regarding the development of children and the treatment of what may occur in those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution like other diseases: rather, it's more akin to our operation and our will, and differently from that in others, it is necessary for us to assign the best operation and the least painful means leading to health, particularly in children.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So I say that the ancients did not recommend circumcision in certain free men, who do not use their laws for this, but rather they have acquired it through experience. The reason is that among most artisans and tailors, circumcision and maiming are done on the foreskin and nipples; and they use tendons on the penis and cuts on the thumb.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these methods and found that the best maiming is on the foreskin, using tendons on the penis similar to maiming on the thumb; this protects against cuts and injuries more effectively. The prepuce has two tunics, and the deeper one remains intact, and when it heals from another cut, it causes less pain securely.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the maiming done by aphecati, which is manual, as blacksmiths use it, it does not ensure a cut at the end of the male organ, for it easily enters the passage of the organ.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Similarly in this operation with the thumb, slightly pressing iron and corroding your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of a child is short by nature, and cuts do not occur in such a manner that it requires maiming, which I have seen.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The maiming done with foreskins and tendons on the penis, its benefits, an insight from experimentation for me, where the foreskins have proportional cuts, so that the sharpness above is as that below; and when you press your hand it proportionally offers two sharpnesses, cutting according to a comparison in one time; and a compression of the penis figure containing the circumcision cord all around, at which there isn't any mistake throughout.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The way of the initial operation is that you make the child stay for a longer period if he's among those who are considered smaller; you do nothing other than let the penis inside its foreskin only, and leave it until another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then proceed to make that pleased in every manner possible that is within your capability as long as he receives his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make that person stay among your servants in a prepared manner, and do not let it be too short; hide the foreskins in your hand or leave them on your thigh, so that the child doesn't see those or any other of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the penis of that person and blow in the cord, and pull it so that the head of the penis comes out, then proceed to maim what is added in the area of swelling.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then place the designated spot on the penis double-folded, then bind a little further down with another small tendon, and later mark out where to cut on the second tendon. Secure this location well for easy future access and cut between two tendons.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then slightly lift the cord, and squeeze the head of the penis; then ease out the suture gradually small by small, as it is better; pause with powder on top and over the powder place a cloth that has been spread with hot oil rubbed recently. Leave this on for another day, and treat it with healing until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the foreskins in maiming is this:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let some of the ends be not-cut (uncircumcised) and others be cut, so that it does not exceed the length of the clitoris shaft, and let the length of both sharpnesses be as long as the length of two middle fingers equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in maiming is when you easily cut off the entire intrinsic cord or part of it; you should avoid this cut.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So proceed to extend that of your time on the thumb in front of the abscess at the site, and cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it on your thumb, then cut that with scissors and cut it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed, and there remains that is swollen after the circumcision abscess, then you leave it so that the abscess scab falls off, and cut out that with ease, and cut it according to what has been prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And protect yourself from the head of the penis, which should not be this way for us.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so treat that with the powders we have recommended in the chapter on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has descended beyond measure, and follows the divisions above, that will not be good for you.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstructions due to stone or clotting, or by insertion or foreign objects, and resembles those for which we have discussed methods of treatment in the section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the retention in your bladder being due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then know that the patient should be restrained from their usual activities.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then have that person lie down with their feet on the other side and spread their back from the part further above their hips, and make the patient hold their breath as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	And thus the neck of the bladder is strengthened to expel the stone from behind the parts, so that the urine is freed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it has not been dissolved as we have said and is very persistent, then the cause must be forcefully applied to the patient, in which case you should prepare for an extraction with a tool called a syringe, of which this is the form: It is made of silver and is slender like lion's tooth, similarly to a needle cannula from Ausel, with a slight thickness equal to that of a long finger, to which there is a fine tube at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of emptying the urine through that is: hold the bent needle and bind it with wool or thread for a good seal; then insert the ends of the needle into the area around the syringe, and if there's any unnecessary cause from the wool, better to get inside the cannula forcefully. Then pull the syringe towards your body and towards the abdomen.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie over the bed, and wet the bladder and penis with rose oil, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And have the syringe inserted smoothly so that it reaches the base of the penis; then fold the penis over above the navel region; and have the syringe pushed inwards; then push that inwards until it reaches the bladder, and ensure that the patient is aligned with an empty cause; this process should not be done out of order but rather based on where there's discomfort.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And have the needle extend through the wool little by little, because urine will wet the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And remove that and perform the urine treatment accordingly, use a syringe, don't stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder and patient experience relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder irrigation with opium and similar instruments which should correspond to this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or a clot within it, or constriction due to insertion, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then it should be done with an instrument called opium clamp, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If the end of it is blunt, then it closes.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three tubes: two on one side, as many times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is a concave place, with what is to be inserted, and according to how much is pushed by that, it's added, when any cause is pushed out from that wetness, it's pushed away, and when it's expelled, so is it pushed away, and when it's expelled for a long time, as the opium clamp does in naval battles where naphtha is saturated.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	And if you want to stop wetness in the bladder, insert the tip of the opium clamp into the moisture and pull it towards what is pushed out upwards, where the moisture is pulled away into the cavity of the opium clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the opium clamp into the penis according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then push moisture into it as you push it, because that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient holds onto it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle catheter by which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or bronze; where the tip is slightly like a small feather, and have its tube inside smoothly.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder and stop there where you want to irrigate with moisture in the bladder; then bind that between two with strong thread on each side, and heat that moisture over a flame.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And insert the tip of the catheter into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And press your hand on the bladder with the moisture, stretch down as much as you can until the patient holds it when that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you do not have access to the bladder, then take a piece of pork and make it into a circle; puncture that with all its roundness; then insert a strong needle in those tubes as they are turned; then add the circle as it is added greaseproof paper, since you leave in that where you want from the moisture, oil and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you lie that one on the instrument and do it in the same way as you did with the bladder, and direct your hand into which moisture will penetrate the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Regarding the extraction of phlegm.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of phlegm and treatment with medicine for it, as well as the difference between phlegm produced by heat and phlegm produced in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the phlegm with which one performs an operation on the body, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the phlegm produced in the bladder is that which is found in the bladder itself.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will explain that with clear and brief exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore it is said that phlegm produced in the bladder predominantly affects children. The signs of this are that urine excreted from the bladder is as transparent as water in its subtlety, and appears with sand-like particles; and the patient rubs their penis and gets red marks on the skin, which tend to heal; and there is a passage from this anus through the dung of these.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And healing for children with that happens within twelve years; and it is difficult treatment for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Among the young, it might be due to this which is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for that one in which more phlegm is present and the treatment is easier; if it's scarce, it's against that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And how do we achieve the treatment of that, we start with the beginning of that which modifies the patient through the cross which draws out all the opening which is in their intestines; for that opening, some treatments prevent the entry of phlegm until their recovery.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then have the patient lie down with their feet up and let them be strengthened and healed by themselves to ensure that phlegm descends to the base of the bladder or escapes from some place or other.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that incision between your hands that are prepared, and let the rest of their things be left as they are for you, so that the bladder is made to bend downwards towards the parts left.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then remove that and all that surrounding area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you feel the phlegm in the space, then you quickly cover it with a section over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't cover it all with your touch, then apply oil to your index finger on the left hand, if the patient is an adult, or a small piece of wax if they are a mature young person, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And remove the phlegm that remains with your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that small amount gradually into the opening of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your finger, and expel that towards the parts outside of the body from the area where you made the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister with their right hand to extend the thighs upwards towards the parts above, and with their other hand lift up the buttocks that are left of the thighs in the part where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spoon inside which has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And split that which is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle place, before the left side of the buttock; and make the section over that phlegm and your finger is in the anus, and it should be a transverse section, so that the opening outside is wide and inside narrowed according to the amount that I remove from the phlegm to you possible, but not excessively, for when we hold your finger which is in the anus the phlegm should allow this section, and it is an open-passing without difficulties.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some phlegm is angular and has edges, which makes the passage of this difficult for this reason.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that one which is lion-like resembling a stick, and is round, and makes it easier for this to pass.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if it's that one with angles and edges, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it's not like this open-passing, then apply as you make on that, or strengthen as you make on that decently, the end of which is like a file with which you strengthen over the phlegm, and don't slip from it; or insert your own delicate instrument with curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you can't on that, then extend a bit of the thread, and if you want to see blood flow, cut it strongly with vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the phlegm is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and then cut over it; and then push slightly towards that area; and similarly do this if there are multiple small ones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is large phlegm, then ignorance is that you make this cut with a large section, which can happen to the patient one of two causes: or it dries up or becomes absorbed into the continuous process of urine, so that the body isn't entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And then administer expulsion of this while it is open-passing, or you make on the crack with scissors so that it pulls out that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe leaves and dragon's blood, and strengthen that area.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth immersed in oil and vinegar, or in grated oil and water, because the doctor allows pus to escape.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then have the patient lie down on their back, and do not loosen the bandage for at least one day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened that, wash the area with water and add oil, and then treat that with tincture of opoponax and tincture of balsam inside until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If pus and corrosive matter occur in the wound, adjust it and make it corroding, and let it resemble as if the urine is frozen inside like a bladder, and for this reason urine is forbidden (and this is known by the discharge of urine into the urine). Therefore intervene with what you said in the wound and remove that urine matter, because if Rome causes the bladder to decompose the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and against all kinds of opposition, use what is suitable for its recovery until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire course of treatment, take care of all the parts and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the wound is small and is in the middle of the scrotum, and urine discharge is prohibited, then treat it with what I recommended before you reach that section; and for this treatment many complaints are noted by its completion. And here is how you do it, because you should take a puncturing tool made of iron, which has this shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	having a triangular tip, sharp, fixed in the handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take the puncturing tool, hold it against the scrotum leaving the wound so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the scrotum, puncturing with ease so that the puncturing tool reaches that wound.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the puncturing tool with your hand in that small wound little by little, and you make the perforation inside so that it allows the other part to penetrate; and urine is released immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is ruptured in the scrotal wound from the part behind the scrotum, because it is squashed and sealed by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not suitable for any reason that forbids it from being done in this manner, then place a file against the wound, and another file above the wound.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then press on the wound in that scrotum between two layers.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the bandage and change the frozen urine in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a file against the scrotum, but rather in order that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage above, otherwise; when removed, the file nears the exit of the wound, the cure then returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary when you have the file above, that you raise the cure to the upper parts, or that you return your operation so that it heals the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the extraction of scrotal hernia in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Scrotal hernia in women is rare.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If there were to be a scrotal hernia with any of those, then it is difficult for the treatment of her, and it is forbidden by many means.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that in women childbirth weakens the muscles of the uterus.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find many women who know how to describe if they have hernia when pregnant, or if it's due to a woman having given birth in the past.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you don't find many women who know this art, particularly manual surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of this section on scrotal hernia in women is far from the site of the hernia, so you need a wave-like incision, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it becomes necessary to do this, then consider that you need a skilled female doctor, who is rare.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking that, then approach a surgeon who is almost subtle, or present a female matron skilled in women's affairs, or a woman who has part of this art down.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that present, and command her to do everything you tell her, from inquiry about the scrotum to beginning; the cause is that she should look if the woman has weakened muscles, then consider putting her own statement in the woman's anus and feel for the hernia.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If she finds that, extract that leaving her statement, then command her to make an incision over that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not weakened, then command the matron to insert her statement into the woman's mouth and inquire about the hernia; because place her left hand on the bladder, and hold that well in a good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If she finds that, then consider gradually guiding that down from the opening of the bladder towards the sides until it reaches halfway through the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise in that position on the area of the male's scrotum where you have to consider the size of any part under them and center the skin at that point, so it doesn't get pushed out by the skin when they are pressed.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the needle into that section, and if you feel the skin, then adjust in section according to how much you know that the skin will penetrate from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the spots of skin are grains: some of them are small and large, rough and hard, long and round, having no edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many spots there are on you for this reason that you specify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to have blood flow, adjust in the place where there is inflammation and leave that for an hour after it has been removed of the inflammation, then return to your operation while the skin is being expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the tools that were mentioned in the extraction of skin in men, so you can be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want blood flow, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery where the incision is made, then you pause the powder over the area and strengthen it with powdered and concentrated essence, and do not continue this; let the skin be and do not remove it, for a sick person will die from this.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the intensity of the blood flow is reduced for some days, and the place has calmed down, then you return to your operation while the skin is being expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Section 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	About inguinal hernia section.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Inguinal hernia is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white matter which contains the tubes carrying urine, and it is called bladder.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes they occur in the proper cavity of them which nature prepares for urine in the part where it is cut, when already there's another urine; and it's the tube of the generative system between the white bladder which we have mentioned, and it is not this but rather a twist.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the cause of this hernia is due to overstretching which affects the reproductive organs, so this substance accumulates among them, and sometimes they occur due to strikes made on the reproductive organs.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has different colors: some of them are decaying to yellow, or bloody, or reddish, or black and greasy, or watery white, which is what it most often manifests as.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one can recognize where this accumulation of water is: if it's in the bladder that we have mentioned, then the lump is somewhat long and resembles the shape of urine, and the reproductive organ appears, for moisture accumulates from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper cavity, then the lump appears near the urine outlet and that's why we estimate that it's another urine.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the reproductive tubes and white bladder, then you will feel its centering.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then inflate the color of the moisture within the lump in the middle part that is cut; and according to how it appears in the trace of the incision, judge what's inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And when we come to the treatment of you at home, then guide that urine flow if this is possible for you, and make him fill his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then he should lie on his back for some cause or another, and place your clean cloths under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left part of him, and instruct that the surgeon follow his right side, who extends his arm to one of two sides towards the tube of the reproductive organs and the opening in the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a longitudinal cut laterally, split the tube of the reproductive organs in the middle place longitudinally through the pubis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to rightness equidistant from the line that should be of the skin of the reproductive organs, until it reaches the white bladder including it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, observe, and take care not to scrape too much; and your scraping is along the part where you scrape from, which seems hanging towards urine more and carefully examine your scraping according to how much it's possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the bladder full of water with a large opening and remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two folds of the incision with scissors, and extend the bladder towards the upper parts; and do not touch the tube of the reproductive organs including it, and puncture the bladder in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And puncture it completely or in pieces, and especially its posterior side which is subtle, for if you do not examine the puncturing carefully, there's no certainty that water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Or if urine proceeds from that outside of its tube during your operation, then when you have completed the bladder incision, return inside it, and adjust both folds of the reproductive organ's tube with stitches, and treat that just like other wounds until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the uterus corrupted by other illnesses, then uncover the vessels that are under the suspensory ligament, and remove the uterus, and properly treat the area we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is divided into two parts, then you know that these are hernias; therefore, cut that part as you did in the other equally; and if it's evident to you that it's an operation, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then clean the wound, and place a piece of cloth in each section where the wool is submerged in oil or roasting oil; pause another cloth which you have submerged in water and oil, and spread that over the two testicles and the belly; pause sheets folded and powders, and place those on top with a mattress according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And make them hold two sheets and fill them with soaked wool according to this resemblance; let the ends where pressure is applied be placed against a spot or wet wool, have them attached to the structure in the crotch of the trousers, one end take the buttocks inside the other, the other end takes the thigh part of the pants, two ends on each thighs and two others on the hips, all tightness should be adjusted in the trousers' waist.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And when this hernia needs to be treated artificially with a cautery in the location of the section at the groin; and you take a fine surgical blade and incise there where the reproductive organs are located, it is ignited according to what we have recommended that the white gall bladder containing the water should be exposed, and then you take a cautery like this:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that gall bladder, and it is ignited so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the gall bladder with forceps, and excise them with forceps, and excise with a heated fine cautery; and cut it as possible for you to remove all of it; and be careful not to let the fire touch the wound.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and further from the wound exudate than an operation at the groin, and better than section operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if you find any contradiction in the pus under the wound or during cautery, or exudate of pus, then uncover what treatment this contradiction causes to you for it, and apply that healing as advised according to it.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	And if the patient is scared and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then you administer perforation according to what I advise; and that's when it should be certified by you, based on what we've said about meanings, that this is an aqueous hernia.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And then uncover that you make the patient lie on an elevated surface, place in a lower part of the wound at the side near the belly button, and perform the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if it's an opening wide enough that all the water flows out completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand on that spot and smooth it out, so that the remaining water can flow away.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat that area where the wound has healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	And if the contradiction is against the elimination of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done unless that white paper in the opening of the wound causes a contradiction and prevents water from being excreted, then uncover how you insert into the wound a strip or instrument on which water is extracted from dropsy, its shape is preceded; or adjust in the elevation of the wound a small piece.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that water returns, and is healed approximately two months or about those; and when it's added, then be pierced according to that method described, so the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol. LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Regarding the section on fatty hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And know that in the section concerning this type of hernia, there is fear lost due to the negligence of major considerations; for me it seems better to avoid you and be saved by that means.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I recall the operation in that one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So I say that abscesses occur in the bodies where the testicles are contained and this is done due to these causes: or by acute excess heat which infiltrates the testicles, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it doesn't get reddened by your pain, and it's a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a soft one is an inflamed abscess, whose color is dark, and doesn't swell your body.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by occlusion of the arteries, and due to this swelling already noticeable from you, or due to swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	And this is due to the spreading of abscesses when you press it with your fingers; and know that don't touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And this one is done due to swelling of veins doesn't spread from any cause, you need the compression with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that sections are made on this species and on other muscles; and you incise the canal of the kidneys, then bring the hand to the parts above, and extract that from the white bladder, and deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, then incise the suspensory ligament since you have delivered that from all sections of the bladder parts.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And if the cow has become like those hardened muscles, then you need to remove the cow and cut into it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion within any part of the bladder or between those parts that are between the veins, then you need to remove all that adhesion and cut into it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is a native tissue formation in the place of adhesion which is behind, then you need to cut everything that belongs to him, and remove the cow also as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And once your operation is completed, then fill the wound with oiled, waxed wool and vinegar; and proceed to treat it like another healing process until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of a hernia that is in the groin.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess enveloped by some kind of sheath resembling a shoot in the process of softening of the testicles, and makes movement, exercise, and walking difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness there is a consideration to avoid what preceded it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, perform the operation as I did for the first one.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that when you have the patient lying on an elevated stool; then place the suspensory ligaments of the testicles at the places I've left; and position the canal of the kidneys with your hands towards the abdomen where they are palpable in relation to the pubic bone; and keep those other servants as well, and extend them with a vigorous extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And proceed to make a deep, sharp incision through a transverse section in the middle of the blood vessels where the blood vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And proceed to remove everything from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are located in the axillae.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And place there a needle in which you have made a double loop, and tie that at the first point of action where blood is flowing out, and then tie it again further towards the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And proceed to make incisions in the middle section by a straight longitudinal cut according to the length of the body, and remove what is added by the humoral putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And treat the wound with healing methods for other wounds where you wish to have health be produced through what falls into the blood vessels which are from one of two kidneys, which is not harmful for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If blood occurs in all veins, then you need to remove the testicles or that part of the testicles for which they are connected by vessels, so as to be deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels and for them to become hardened, or that is what becomes mature for those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia happens when it invades the bladder spreading out over the abdomen from the angles of the abdominal cavity, so that the contents of that rupture come to some of the parts.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the bladder or from its contents, and it happens in these two species due to various causes: by impact, by jumping, by crying out, by lifting something heavy, or by stretching.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it's due to the extension of the bladder, is that it occurs gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly. It's an abscess equally distributed inside the abdomen because the bladder presses on the intestines.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this happens when it's due to a section in the bladder, at first it causes sudden severe pain; and there appears an abscess differing in appearance from the canal that seems to be close to the surface, and this is due to movement of the intestines, and the body is above the bladder sections behind.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some ulcers occur on the surface of the intestine, this condition is called an intestinal hernia with a bag.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some ulcers are caused by windiness, some ulcers occur inside the intestine cavity and they get stuck there, this causes great discomfort in the stomach. Other ulcers cause pain and it is worse when they are pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of these conditions caused by this illness, there is concern, so you should avoid that which causes pain in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of performing the operation for that is to command the patient to draw up the intestines with his hand towards the inner parts of its cavity if he returns according to his own movement, then wrap it around his collarbone between your hands and lift up their breasts.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then pinch the canal which connects to the testicular canal upwards, and cut the testicular canal all along its length; and place two incisions on either side of the section according to what you need for opening that section.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if you have the ability to take out as much of that section as possible from within it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape off those small blisters which are left from the chain of the testicles, while it is revealed the white hard scab on each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then insert your finger into that which is cut on the testicle, into that which is between the white scab, which is left from the chain of the man's body, and between the scab secondarily, and cleanse around that adhesion which is in the part behind the man.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then direct your hand to the chain of the testicles towards the parts behind, and also extend the white scab on his left hand, and lift him up to the scab at the part of the section; and command the attendant to hold him up while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the hernia being wrapped in the hard white scab.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause from him, then remove that from his belly region.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick thread of about four threads, insert it at the edge of the scab, which is under the chain of the testicles, that is the section; and then pierce both ends which emerge from the thread within, making sure there are four threads. And then weave some strands over several shapes in a cross-like manner; and tie with that piece of the scab about which we said it is left from the chain of the testicles with great firmness at two points.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads, tying them firmly in such a way that some of the vessels that nourish those can't pass any cause for here not to develop abscesses.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then pause for a second tying tightly after the first tie, three fingers away from his waist. And smooth this other two ties on the scab which is left from the chain of the testicles, as much as the size of the mentioned one, and pierce everything else around it in a round manner, leaving him alone.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then pierce the part left of the chain of the testicles through this section where it can run with healing and health as we have recommended in what we said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool dipped in oil, pause on the wound; and apply the binding (and some white scabs are cauterized as we said near the incision of his testicles' flow, where several parts can happen to these parts) and smooth the tie so that it falls naturally.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If his healing is delayed, then let salt water be applied, pause over it so that it falls according to what we said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	On venous hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, it has not been observed that one can be burned during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones say that it is done this way as we have recommended in the hernia which is with veins; which is that you tie up the vessels near the section above that for him's ease; and dry off in the middle area around where I do this, within which the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound according to what we said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that happens in joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some parts may rupture in joints as we have said, and rise up from the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not let any cause of hernias affect the body; and if they do, it's few; and return to these always.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if the time with that extends, there is a break in the scab where the hernia descends into the scab; and this happens due to the extension of the scab which is in joints as we have said, this cause is that the scab is stretched, and then it softens the place becomes inflamed and rises.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for him is with a cautery as we have mentioned in the previous description of this.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some cases are cured with iron according to this manner: that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then dry off the area of the rupture of the abscesses apply at the section by width as much as three fingers in quantity.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white scab which is under the chain where it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rod and pause it on the prominent part of the scab, and press it against the belly's front.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then pinch the two prominent spots on the end of the rod of the scab, and adjust to the suture one of those with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the rod, and do not pierce through the scab entirely, nor extend the man or any other cause such as I know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you pierce those threads, clean it up and restore the wound until it is consolidated; which is that the scab tightens and there isn't a bulge from rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	A pointed cautery is better in this location, which is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	About the softening of the chain of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The veins of the chain of the testicles in some men are softened due to heat; this causes the muscles that are within that area to become softened and requires care for it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	So it is necessary for the one who is treated in the cure of him to make the patient lie according to his age, and unfold the entire chain that is softened above the natural chain; and then adjust two lips against the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, as in the beginning, with an excess of the softened chain there can be three or four sewings and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then you should enter between the stitches; and later treat with recovery from the other wounds until it is healed and falls off the scabs.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	About castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is condemned, but due to the instructions given to me, I will remember it in this free text; and there is no need for remembering about it except for two reasons, of which one is that when a doctor asks about it, he should know how to treat the one who undergoes it. The other reason is that since we often have a need for castration in our livestock due to their juvenile needs as well as in mares, dogs, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either through excision, or through incision up to the testicles.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of that one where it is done through excision, the method of the operation is to make an incision in a horse with tail water until the testicles swell and become reddened so they hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then you should take those ones in your hand while they are resolved, so that there do not appear any marks from touching them.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in castration done through incision and sectioning, you should have the animal and press the chain of the testicles from it with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then you should tie the suspensorial, and cut through each one of them with an incision until two testicles are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then you should cut out the pus that you have scraped from any of them.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave anything on those of the penis, but leave only the subtle one which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done through excision because the excision slightly leaves a cause of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	About the treatment of androgyny.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Androgyny in men occurs in two ways: one is when orifice appears in the chain of the testicles, in that place between the two testicles where a male part with female hair can be seen.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some cases involve urine flowing from that opening which is located in the chain of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In females it is a special case: that the male part is located above the pubis like two male testicles, all slightly smaller than those of a man and in front like the prepuce of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is divided into three types: for two cases of men, and for one case specific to women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you should make incisions through those muscles so that the discharge of that one escapes, and then treat them with recovery from other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second case of men where urine escapes from that opening which is located in the chain of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	About cough and flesh protrusion due to female conditions.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong cough is adjusted to natural causes that have been relaxed and requires careful attention; some cases are exaggerated in certain women as much as in men, and proceed into sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	So you should take the excess of coughing with your hand or a tool and cut it out.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish with cutting, especially at the beginning of the throat, for fear that no pus will flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with treatment until it is healed from other wounds.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Rough meat is meat that appears in the mother's uterus filling it up, and forcefully comes out through parts ahead according to the shape of a penis (and for this reason some early ones called it "tail disease"); so you should cut it out like cutting coughing, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	About the treatment of arrhagia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arrhagia is when the male part of a female (assuming 'femna' should be 'female') isn't pierced, or there's a small opening.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to tail disease that has preceded, and this one is done or through rough meat not adjusted or through a subtle penis.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it can occur in the mother's womb, or on her body, or from excessive pus inside her, or from lower pus, and you forbid intercourse, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strongly forbid menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is achieved through observation of the doctor, if there's an obvious increase, move it upwards; but if it's not obvious, then you look for that near your fingers or by your side.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the increase is subtle and close to the two lips, then you press on it and try to relieve that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you press over the two lips with dust, then place your fingertips on both their chests.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs spread out, and you extend both lips as far in so that the subtle increase is relieved and the swelling opens.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And you take wool, soak it in oil, and place that over the affected area, then leave it there for a day to ensure the incised spot doesn't heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the lump is large and thick, then you need to incise it on a flat surface or under a mint leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the swelling is due to pus, then suspend that with a string, and cut it there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop the flow of sweat and itching, such as cacao, sweat from dragon plants, and others, mix them with butter.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And administer an open-ended lead tube, so that the wound doesn't heal quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep that there for a few days and apply lard oil.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And afterwards, use another method of healing to ensure it heals properly before it becomes healthy.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the main digestion of other organs, and you need to cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it's due to a bad boil, for the boil in the main body, don't let it be treated against iron using any method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment for hemorrhoids, and tail, and the red boil that happens in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the affliction of the openings of varicose veins where blood flows continuously from them; and if they're old hemorrhoids, then this is their state.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already mentioned in the division of those and their signs, and to say that these receive treatment and these do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So it's said that hemorrhoids and boils when they're in the first phase of pregnancy and not showing symptoms, then there should be no treatment with iron for those.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those are the ones that are in the mother's openings where you can feel them, they are those that receive treatment.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you need to immerse the woman in warm water and then extend her abdomen with flax or on a coarse cloth, and cut them at their roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then apply the sweats of the iron's sweat powder to relieve sweating and itching, such as cacao and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the sweating persists, then have her make a decoction of sumac and water from rhubarb and juniper berries and herbs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oregano, mix that with honey and wine vinegar, prepare a poultice with it over the back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the sweat is removed, then drink it; otherwise, attach two blistering plaques and on the nipples make cuts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in colander juice or in the juice of elderberry or in vinegar mixed with water, to attach it to the place; and then treat the place with oil until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if you find that it is of hard observation, then cut this in such a way that your appearance from that follows what I said about boils.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat that until it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the operation of percuting a hernia accident during pregnancy.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Types of boils that happen during pregnancy, such as hard boil, boil with pus, ulcers, hemorrhagic, and other boils.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these illnesses and their types and their signs, as well as their treatments in the section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know that in this treatise on boil caut, which appears during pregnancy from the boils that cause illness, if you want to know how to perform its operation with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the boil at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and pus, fever, and sometimes it reddens and if you can feel it on that, then note to perform an operation on it, and treat that with what helps in the maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you should have her cut the woman on a bench that has two benches; lie down on her back and place her legs at the lowest part of the belly, spread out her thighs, lay her hands under her shoulders, and tie them in such a way as is comfortable.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow her left hand and administer the tool where she has opened the opening of the womb, its shape will come about in those causes that are to be explained later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to administer this tool, place it on the axis of the mother's hand in the female, and whatever enters into the mother from the instrument must not exceed the size of the mother's hand and affect the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the mother's hand, then when you do this, cover the mother's hand texture with powder so that it prohibits all tools from entering into the mother's hand.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And when you do this, make sure the tool rotates while moving upwards on the instrument of the male's urethra, and that the minister holds the instrument and rotates the tool until it opens the opening of the mother.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when excitement appears and touches the hand and is hot and wet, then when this happens, make sure to dry that area by spreading on it a damp cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sweat is evacuated, then when this occurs, make sure to place in the wound a sponge submerged in rose oil or castor oil with some irritation; and place the foot on the area near the mother's hand.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And wet the mother with water, and over the knees place woolen bandages soaked in water containing walnuts.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And approximately two days later apply grease which is suitable for use once it's become healthy.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some washes are made for the mother and the wound with water mixed with honey, so that it is treated in water, then return to using grease.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep inside the mother's body, then when you must prevent treatment of him with iron, instead treat it with what we have said in this section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives in what manner to treat pregnant women when they show symptoms that deviate from a natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause is that the midwife knows the figure of normal childbirth by means of signs on her person, and when you observe a woman expelling her waters and wanting to smell the air, and in this way she is encouraged by what happens with her during labor, and accelerates the expulsion of the embryo. Then you know that this labor is according to a natural figure, and it is the expulsion of her towards her head, and the second one either hanging or suspended below the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you observe those signs, then ensure that her belly is compressed by itself so that the embryo descends slightly when it comes down over its head. Then give her the second one, and get rid of those excesses for good correction.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is the other of this labor is not-natural and unmanageable, when the embryo is expelled on its feet and the body of the woman is seated in front of her head, and her legs are one, or under her waist... or when the head of the woman is expelled and her hand is, or towards her belly, and heavily it is converted onto her neck, and resembling those unmanageable figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	The necessary cause is that the midwife should be knowledgeable and discerning in all those causes, and avoid error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you all the figure of those, and which organs are in those for what it signifies and its state on that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When it is expelled over its head by natural effort, and that is vigorous on the woman and makes her have a hard part, and sometimes weakens her virtue, then she must do this treatment, or what women should do for themselves, and evaporate her sweat with fenugreek tea and with wetted olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And later the midwife should intervene between her little belly and small opening for the second one, or dry that in her ear with what is within her for humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly so that she expels the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it doesn't come out, then when this happens, make the woman sweat from garlic juice and garlic oil.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And later command her, near the cramps, that she is squeezed and makes her sneeze with a cold; and leave her mouth and her nose open for an hour, so that the fetus can exit immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both ends of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then when this occurs, make sure to reduce those with gentle stimulation gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if you don't follow the instruction, then when this happens, have the woman lie on her side and lift her feet up, and later return the leg to the ground; and make sure the woman doesn't fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the ends are not reversed and push out the fetus, then insert those and extract the membranes of the fetus or tie it to her stomach with a cloth and extract that when it is expelled immediately.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	During expulsion of the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus comes down over its feet, then when this occurs, make sure to push those inwards, and later make the fetus smaller, and make that equal, and take one of her feet and gradually extend those inwardly.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When it comes inside the thighs, then when this happens, command her to expel and make her sneeze with a cold condition; if it is expelled immediately when God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not correctly treated as we have recommended, then you return the operation little by little into what will make the second natural figure appear, which will be somewhat easier in terms of discomfort.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited for all that we have recommended, then take a bandage of hemp and of dissolvable rubber, and crush them together in the mortar with good pounding, and draw a line on what we call the woman's womb, the base of the belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And make that incision in hot water, so that it achieves the under-ribs.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And as often as your parts from you are hardened, then have them smoked with myrtle and place that under you.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have smoked it for an hour, then make that incision on a table, and proceed to sneeze and open your mouth wide, then stand up from there, and apply gentle pressure to the lower part of the patient's abdomen, so that the operation will soon become less painful.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examination of the belly over their thighs and breasts.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the operation proceeds according to this form, then you introduce your hands gradually; and have the woman lying on her back, and place her feet in the air, and those should be supported by a pillow, and fulfill her breasts.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gently press on the abdomen little by little, and gradually remove what is under her feet from the earlobes while preparing for the incision area.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the operation is not correctly performed, then take her feet and shake them vigorously, and proceed to press what is on the under-ribs gradually into the area where the operation should be conducted, so that it can reach the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And introduce her breasts gradually, and guide the operation little by little, and command the woman to express herself as soon as the operation is properly performed.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examination of the back position of the fetus while hanging one of its breasts.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Have it guided in the reduction of her hand, or if you cannot reduce that, then lift the woman and let her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she can't go, then have her lie on the table, and shake her thighs with strong vibration, and proceed to administer sponges which I use and recommend for purgatives.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child has come out, then make that incision on a table, and proceed to study about hand reduction, and guide the operation according to the natural figure, and have the woman sneeze and command her to squeeze herself as soon as it becomes less painful.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examination of the fetus hanging over its neck, spreading its breasts and the tissue around her is twice as long as her mother's.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Have the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and gently rotate that little one bit by bit, so as to make it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when they are equal and what is long, then place pressure on the chest of her which we have recommended using oil and purgatives.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command her to slowly become pregnant little by little, and when you have done that, then make that incision on a table and command that she be inclined over the right side, and proceed to command her to squeeze herself; and have her sneeze with concentration.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The expulsion of the prepared fetus onto the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it is expelled from the mother according to this method, consider, and then you cut into the second on your thumb as it is freed of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging on its mother's neck and face, then you cut into that of the belly button, so as not to be retained and to drain.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And proceed to push the fetus into the parts inside as you guide that second which comes out, command the woman to squeeze herself several times, and it will become less painful soon, if God permits.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The expulsion of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Understand that twins and multiple pregnancies are natural, and sometimes there may be three or four of them, but this is unusual and rare; mostly these are caused by nature, not by human intervention.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count them, whether they are multiplied, one second, and are separated by ciphers, distinguish those among the ligament in each of those. Some pregnancies may become divided as if it were a fetus through natural expulsion somewhat quickly, and others may be expelled as if it is not possible through any method that we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some are difficult for you to handle, proceed with the delivery and move towards what we have mentioned about the non-natural figures, then take care of those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and makes it as easy and with finesse, and in case of delay, and guided according to all figures so that her skill leads to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering what forms inside the womb from embryos and gets aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some boils are formed in the mother's region one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, at which point you should verify that if a female miscarries her first child, and another x of them, this is caused by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this is covered that it be in the science of medicine which greatly resembles this, and thus remains with this as long as one covers it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for a dead fetus in accordance with what we have discussed in the division of medicine and it doesn't move outwards, and you are hesitant to use an operation with your hands, then consider if the woman is healthy and not affected by any conditions that could cause loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then consider if the woman is laid on her side over a bed, and if the head of the fetus is tilted inwards and her thighs are raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should have that part covered or be bound on the bed, so that the body of the patient does not extend during fetal extraction.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil and with moistened mullein, and with fennel and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then anoint the woman's hand with those oils and remedies, and place her hand comfortably under the patient, and arrange her hand so that it stays in touch with the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place them conveniently in this: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be descending through its head, and in that case you should have your hands on its hips, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or let it hang freely from your chin, or on its sternum, or on the appropriate locations of the back, or let the lower parts be free.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If descent is through its feet, then in the buttocks, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And have the hand on the right side, pressing against the curvature of it in that location which is between the last two fingers of the left hand, and place your hand comfortably to press and keep the hand in one of those locations we've mentioned until it reaches the lower part.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then press and stay in the position of its other hand, or use the elbow if necessary, to ensure a balanced pressure, rather than extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And apply your strength to every part, so that the movement of the fetus is eased in the same way as when removing a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And apply that which is between them so that the extension becomes softened; and if any part of it is being held, then consider to have the woman oil some of her fingers with oil and skillfully insert those into the area that is being held, and turn around that which is being obstructed.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is too far out, then have your hands pressed against the location that is more appropriate; and do this until all the fetus is out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is inside and it's not possible to reduce that by pulling on it, then consider having a cloth wrapped around it; and then extract it until everything is out, and cut it in the location of the hand or at the side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this for the other hand and for both feet as well.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or if it's caught during the birth process, or if there's water around the head and it fits snugly, then consider inserting the fingers into the shoulder's spinous space and widen the head, or find an instrument named "alundat" that can be used to separate this area, with its shape resembling other tools close to this section.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the fetus has naturally large head: then consider cutting that area with string or using something like an "alundat" as we've mentioned, and then use the forceps to extract the bones.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is within and is being squeezed at the sternum, then cut into it where the moisture in the feet can be released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If there is no complication or obstruction to delivery, then consider cutting the head as soon as it's feasible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the ends of the belly are stuck or in its ydopod region, then consider piercing that area where the moisture is.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the fetus is above its feet, then the movement of it is gentle and its direction towards the mother's mouth is gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it's being squeezed between the abdomen and the feet, then consider extracting that with cloth you've wrapped around your hand, cut through the abdomen and feet where the fluid flows in that area.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are still and turn the head, then consider inserting your left hand; if the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand in the area of the ribcage, and close it around that head, and pull it with your hands towards the mother's mouth, and then place one or two fingers in there and pull her.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is being squeezed by a hot boil that affects one, then consider not to raise it above her; before doing this, give the administration of fluid from causes of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, make it straight: and apply what we've said about live fetuses.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be done by incision, and then extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure there are no leftover causes from the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we said about treatment for the pus-filled, heated areas that occur from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is discharge of pus, then treat with warm waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in her belly who was carrying death, and further about that fire there was another pregnancy taken, and further death is the thing carried.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A long time ago an ulcer occurred in his abdominal region; and it inflated inside like a fire, and began to bleed.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called upon to treat him, and treated him for a long time, and the disease has not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	And I applied some powerful attraction plaster to him, and made him sweat with him for several days, and then made him sweat with another one; and I was too amazed, because there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	And then I cleansed the wound, and extracted bone from him, the woman being in her abdominal position, and had been suffering in such a manner for a long time, I healed him of a little of his bleeding.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not consider it strange, but rather that in this is knowledge and assistance to what the medical art allows for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the tools necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of inversion in which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which the free are equalized, to which equality are two strengths at the ends of two fetuses.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this strength should be more subtle in straining, and it should be made of wood or cane.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of any pole is two fingers and the edge of each side is one finger, and the length of each is a hand and half; and in the middle of the two poles are two adjustments for those metal poles which are already fixed, of which the length is almost a hand plus, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that they open when you rotate the two prescribed strengths.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to this one, which is subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of wood or cane according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two additions like that sometimes; and the length of those additions is almost a hand, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then you cut the woman on her back so that her legs are hanging, open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the tool like you do with scissors according to the amount that you want from the depth of the mother's mouth, while you measure it as you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of inversion which the ancients would say:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of a pusher on which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of assistance on which the large head is turned:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end like that sometimes, some pregnancies are done long like that like forceps according to this form, like that, in which the teeth are like the teeth of saws on which incision and turning are made.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form for a short assistance:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an uncinate with one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an uncinate with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps where the teeth are closed on which the head of the fetus is turned.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula with two ends on which the head is severed.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two spatulas side by side:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied by the species of that one and they are prepared you should use them according to the artificers, it is lighter for their operation and more appropriate depending on the quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments already whether you are equipped with them or you should equip yourself, for the need of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Regarding the extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained, you should give birth to it, then realize that you must command the mother to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with condiments, and strengthen your hand on her mouth and on her nostrils, and if by this she comes out, it's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take one spoon and puncture in the roof a groove and pause at that herb to open the mother's mouth, like with a hot and rough and nettle and chamomile and powdered gum Arabic and cassia lignea and st anthyllis.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the spoon, and pause that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place an ear tube in the mother's mouth, then let that be where the vapor goes into the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And perform that sneeze there as we have said, and the second time let it come out quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May you approve this cure and not be disturbed, then you instruct the midwife to submerge her left hand in saffron oil or in an alum solution, then immerse that into her stomach and when she feels it a second time, like when she finds it, then take it out slowly. May if it adheres to your body, then you put her hand as we have recommended, and when she finds the second one, extract it gradually according to correctness so that the mother does not fall back with her effort.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Afterwards, make sure it is easy to bend both in front and behind on both sides.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust it in the amount of effort, so that it obeys and avoids adhering.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, as we have recommended, this cure with sneezing and with medication of the air with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	May if it is not resolved in all the causes that we have recommended, then remember to not tire yourself out with repetition, but rather make sure what escapes from you into the mother's mouth remains on the woman's cheek. Then apply that with ointment and tetra-formula; so that which will dissolve and come out easily over several days.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When you lie down, it raises the mother's illness to the head and stomach, and this causes the disease in the mother; then make sure that sub-smoke treatments and suitable things are administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Just like the ancient ones already use sub-smoking with pine needles and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Formulate a device for this tool that the woman should be sub-smoked so that it retains her menstrual flow and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of wood or reed.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle end is placed in the stomach and the broad end over the fire, and the sub-smoking should be placed above the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that be where that sub-smoke is consumed and repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Regarding the cure for an unperforated child's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Newborn babies don't have their butts pierced, which are small and thick.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to pierce that small intestine as recommended; and if not, pierce it with a sharp needle, and make sure not to touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place over that wool soaked in vinegar and oil; and then treat it with ointment inside where it is safe.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May if you fear that it's thick, then leave an ear tube in the newborn for several days, and observe when the child wants to pass gas.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if it happens that thickening of the anus occurs due to infection or abscess; then make sure that this thickening is dissolved, and apply the cure as we have recommended for the treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas that occur in patients.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur during childbirth in the lower exit are soft and large, which often occur near the anus outside or in the space of one of the exits.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or marks.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and prone to moisture with white or scaly humidity, some of these eruptions are from these fistulas sometimes penetrating them.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those that penetrate are known as they escape by exit and through wind; some of them use the mother's exit, and forcefully escapes from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some eruptions from those fistulas penetrate into the bladder, and inside the shaft of the penis; and some of them penetrating between the thighs and inside the anus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the kind of fistula that penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate is that you insert your recommended device into the anus, then gently insert a reed or iron rod into the fistula when it's not too tight.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	May if there's tightness in that, then insert a subtle lead rod or horse hair into it where you feel the rod or the hair on your recommended device.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you don't feel that through all or none of it is causing any cause of discharge or worm or wind, as we have said, then know that it's not penetrating, and now do the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or inside the shaft of the penis, then this signifies that there's an escape of urine from it and prohibition for you to add to this situation where the location has medical treatment consolidation.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May if it penetrates into the thigh joint or inside bone accompanied by pain in the circulation, then this is a sign that the rod passes here if there's not tightness inside the bone and pain in the circulation of childbirth; and that it produces constant pus; and that this treatment does not help, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure for everything, and the treatment of those consists of hard work and the skills of doctors on which they operate.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In cases where it is not penetrating or old, healing with iron and hope is expected according to what I will tell you, and what I have already experienced and proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that when the patient lies between your hands above their belly and elevates their legs inside them, with their thighs inclined towards their abdomen, you introduce a lead or an iron rod if it's in the fistula, until you know the location where the introduction of the tool occurs.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that pain is around the neck, then you should introduce your prescribed instrument into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your hand that the object has already been discovered and is being exposed by penetrating it, another thing that you feel between your hand and that siphon or flesh, then you will surely know that this is penetrating; and from then on do not work on this, because there is no healing in this, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, it's often said that some people are healthy for others.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which youth is expected in them, you should use a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeatedly introduce it two or three times until you know that all those flesh tissues adhered to the fistulized area resemble a feather down.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And after that, treat that with heat wrapped in bandages until all those tissues that are adhered recover, and then treat that with medicines causing healing and consolidation. If it is healed, it's good; otherwise, it's not healed within a time for another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the object enters and does not penetrate your hand which is in the buttocks, and between that and the object that is thinly covered with flesh or siphon, and when the fistula is found within where it touches the skin of the anus, then dry out the anus from the start of the fistula. Then watch if it dries up, and if it's inside the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the object protrudes, and that way the object will be released and exit.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And afterwards, refine those flesh tissues that resemble the feather of a goose and do not disturb any part of them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And indeed, when there is a discharge of pus that comes between you and your operation while touching those tissues, then the amount should be treated with a small instrument heated either with fire or with acute medicine; when using fire to cauterize it adjusts well twice. This corresponds to healing those adhered tissues and the excision of pus through the elimination of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And afterwards, treat that with heat wrapped in bandages or in rough fabric until the affected area becomes strong, and then proceed to treat the wound with hard flesh medicines for healing and consolidation.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these are medicines that have a restorative and drying effect; when this happens, it is already healed and you do not fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula already protrudes into the rectum and is extended from the body's surface, then you should introduce your hand into the anus and investigate that area.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you find the object and between you and it is thinly covered with siphon or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it's not an operation in them but rather according to trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This situation can be handled in one of three ways: either by cauterizing that object as we have described; or by allowing the healing to occur within a point where you regain control of the situation so it's possible for you to manipulate that area and allow the healing process to continue; do not allow movement with drying procedures lest you penetrate the membrane containing the anus, and let your intention guide you over the patient's rectal pain during the process; then proceed by treating that area according to what we've said that leads to strength in health; or extend that object gently while draining any pus that dries up within the proximity of the anus as we have described, either on the object or with a sharp tool, and then refine those fistulated flesh tissues which are within the drying zone where you can apply pressure; and finally strive to restore the entire wound by drying, and if there's still pus above not consolidating, and opens up the fistula in the anal part, and only minor pus leaks over the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And there are times when the fistula ends according to this method: when you introduce the object into the fistula and is in the middle of the anus around the skin near the anus and at the margin of the anus, then it has the appearance of an perforated extremity that resembles a needle as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And you should introduce the object into that layer wrapped in silk or around it; then proceed to introduce an object inside the layer within the fistula until you regain control of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if it penetrates near the margin of the anus towards inside, then you should remove that object as you introduce your hand into the anus; and remove the tip of the object and adjust both ends equally, strengthen each one, and let this rest for a day or two. And when more of the object is penetrating into the flesh, strengthen it within those parts of flesh which are between the two ends of the object and can fit inside.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound once it has been consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrate in any manner that you have prepared, but rather in the region where it is present, so that you do not cause an incision that would leak; and then allow that to happen until it has healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of splitting the spine-like structure which is torn by the fistula: the curvature of that one is made quite sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not make unnecessary incisions, thus sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing hemorrhoids where there is inflammation in the site of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: when they are within resembling the buttocks like charcoal, or make those appear like raisin fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large ones, and the inflammation from those comes suddenly, and it's one for them all, and they're spots, and they're inside the anus, and at the extremities of that.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus occur according to the times of little humidity, from which water turns yellow or has a slight inflammation in the body continuously, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to squeeze when the anus leaks and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Therefore you prepare yourself and suspend with ropes or whatever you have those near your knee, and then strike those at their joints.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the ropes are not near those due to their moisture and softness, then take them with stiff fabric or with a cloth or with woolen sheet, pull those at your knees, and then strike those using your fingers, and place some powdered remedies over those close to the incision; or cauterize those according to what is prescribed in the section on cauterizing in this treatise.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with the other treatment until they heal.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not allow passage, then anesthetize the patient with anesthesia that includes a slight bite, and wash them with water from the anus that allows mild passage when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is minor, so you should hold those near your knee, or take those with ropes and strike them, and then treat those as we have said until they heal.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who has made an incision, take care to administer stitches according to this manner: take a covered thread and insert it into a needle and then remove the hemorrhoids from their locations, and make that pass through the needle at the joint of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the location beyond the needle, and longitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, and then clip the thread and pull out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leave one undone for that reason, because the excess fluid from the inflammation will drain through that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place over the anus cloth soaked in olive oil or bandage, and place that under the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wait for that to settle in; and when it heals, treat those with grease or other treatments until they heal.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Wounds that occur due to the rupture of a fissure or due to constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and do not benefit from that medicine, then make sure to clean those with the tip of the spine or with your knee until they become wet and have exuded pus above, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat those until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And then you keep that with an abundance of pus the first time until it causes inflammation and is scratched; and then treat those until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Regarding the treatment of abscesses, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that abscess formation is the key, and not otherwise until you notice a reddening resembling the end of a needle throughout the body, especially in the limbs and hands, and for those pains, you should walk.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then take care to make the one that is in the circulation of the key to be cut, and keep it with scissors or with ropes, and remove its joint; and then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is prescribed in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	True warts are small, hard, round, and fleshy tumors on the surface of the body, and abscesses often occur in many children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for treatment, you should spread it out or make an incision on it, or tighten it with thread or cloth until it settles.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this, as we have said, with fire or using acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are eradicated both forwards and backwards with the tool I mentioned before.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	An ant is a small, soft or fleshy tumor that occurs on the surface of the body near the anus, and when you touch it feels like the bite of an ant, and it occurs around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment is to take a needle from the eagle or from the peacock's plumes, ensure it is strong, place that over the sting inside which the circle of the needle contains the part of his body; then rotate your hand around the needle as you pierce through the stinger circuit and stop at the base of the flesh, and extract the stinger from its wound.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with an awl needle or iron according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Make the part above the needle hole to be fine and silent (meaning not to cause perforation), wrapped around it, that on the said place of his body would have an appearance removed and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the stinger according to what was mentioned before in the cauterization of thyme in the tip of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In terms of the tools that you should use for bleeding.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some times bleeding is done with silver or tin spoons, melted or hammered instruments; and some times it's done with small and large tools depending on which ones you use. The smaller ones are used for treating small children in the healing of minor wounds; and for those where sores are present or painful, the bleedings from these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large but few bleeding:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the needle of his body above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and place him in such position that the bag, when tied, is similarly positioned as often.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of his pus, which enters the anus, should be closed (meaning not to open) as smooth as a lion's claw; and in one side of this pouch there are two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the size of the cut according to the thickness of the pus, being larger for thicker ones.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And make the bag in which the medicines from a beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed, and his wound should be about one handspan.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be punctured through smooth cuts as they are rotated; and if the space between those cuts is about its size.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those cuts a strong piece of raw honey as about ten pieces, or roughly that number. Adjust the bag to this place; and when you place the bag on him, make it stretch in the tip of bleeding between two distinguished with strong constriction, and bleed under each cut: The quality of bleeding under these is that you fill the bag with medicine, heat it according to the tolerance of the patient; and watch that it's not too deep nor too shallow.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should lie on his back, and lift their legs up and place them somewhere under him with another person or a stick; and then grease the tip of the cautery with oil, or with egg white or with extract of fennel or fenugreek; and then insert this into the anus with ease, and the healer should take the bag and squeeze it twice vigorously each time until everything inside the bleeding is evacuated out through the intestine; and then remove the bleeding and lift their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine pushes this into urine, use as much as you can; and if he sleeps with this for the entire night, it will be better later in adulthood.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you bleed this in the patient's abdominal fluids and urine leakage, then you will repeat this cauterization until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or boils in the anus, then this bleeding should be fine and gentle, like bleedings for children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Regarding the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already mentioned in the division of treating wounds what was suitable for free treatment, and thus I will say this treatment with me and with medicines according to its nature.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So I say that the wounds are diversified depending on how they occur and according to where they appear on his body.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for why small stones cause wounds are like gallstones, or injury of body parts, or impalement by bone, spear, or arrow, or from substances that cause stone formation.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the wounds that are in parts of his body are like a wound that affects the head, or neck, or feet, or stomach, and so on for other limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I suggest treating some wounds by suspending this reasoning and rule about the others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head wounds, for the consideration of compound wounds will come in the beginning of the next chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So I say that when a simple head wound occurs and is not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to gallstones or something similar, already has taken the medicine until enough and it's large head wound and you fear the patient might get an internal abscess from this, then you should urinate and perform cephalic bloodletting immediately, don't delay this; and extract according to his virtue if there is no reason prohibiting bloodletting, especially if the discharge coming out of the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And make bloodletting from opposite side of the wounded part; and watch that the patient doesn't overfill, doesn't drink water and doesn't eat heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If you prohibit any cause from the beginning, then it will be diminished by food and not approach meat nor drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the wound, if it happens that there is an abscess on him, apply oil heated either in fire or in water in which it is antiseptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of an abscess on the fire, then place over the wound, if it is near to his heart and air has not changed that powder which I recommend very finely.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then place upon any ointment inside that is healing.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or due to dissection and similarity, and his lips are not adjusted for pins, then adjust those according to the stitches I recommend for their stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been discovered from the bone and flesh, and it is not retention for him but a small suspensorium, then incise that and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the defect. Command the patient to eat vegetables where there are fibers: cabbage and forms like meat and similarity, until it is cooked.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is putrefaction in the defect and does not stick to the bone, then you must incise all that pus and let it out, and cure that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these wounds an artery or vein that could cause bleeding exists, and it is not removed by medicines, then you must inquire about the artery, and if you find that unincised one, then you must incise that with a sharp tool, or tie that; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not apply to you, then you must cauterize until the blood stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is minor. Therefore, you should powder this powder over them, until that powder stabilizes before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of this powder is as follows: take oil of pomegranates part one, of dragon bark a part two, and of unextinguished tar parts three; grind it all thoroughly and sift it. Then fill your wound with this, and press it tightly for good compression until you can pour it over that, and then solidify in the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then sprinkle that with powder and leave it, do not remove it until you find that it has healed, which means that the medicine does not have to be taken internally for it to heal.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes you can do this alone with a cautery, when you don't have pomegranates and dragon bark available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is done in large wounds when it seems fit to place it over those and tighten them, and the wounds are recent with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it's during summer time, then this method of placing this powder in its usual position is not applicable, rather treat those with what we've said, so place some digestible ointments over those, or you put these flour pols from the barn into water and honey until they turn into a paste; and further heal them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If there is an accident on the fracture wound in the bone and it's small, then you extract that with your hands.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I direct the treatment of head fractures in what is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds on the chest.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the wound occurs in the neck, then there's no difference in treatment compared to a simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the neck nerves or artery is incised, then if it's the nerve, it should not be treated internally in his stomach but avoid using substances that cause intense coagulation like zinc and say that they are toxic and similar to those that damage the nerves and constrict them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause over the wound that frees it, for the substance of nerves is freed and its continuation is in the brain which is the essence of all parts of the body.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is treated with minor medicines like washing in hot or unheated oil, or when washed in boiled water and the other minor burns are treated according to this manner, then ointments are applied.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then you should perform stitches, or tighten his lips, and further heal that with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound has depth or occurs in his lower part near the surface, then pierce that at the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery is already incised in the wound and bleeding has been achieved, then you should separate or dry that, or tie it, or cauterize that if necessity requires.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have already incised the spondyls of the gole or all of them, and the veins on the chest are saved, then adjust his lips for stitches over the gole's stalk but do not touch that; equalize that and reduce it to its natural shape, then strengthen that with a decent structure, leave it for several days; further heal that with ointments where there is coagulation and stimulation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already created damage in the bone, then puncture that, and if there are bone fragments in him, extract all those you can from them; whatever cannot be removed, leave it until the wound heals, and make sure his relief is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then apply over that powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the wound a fistula has formed, then treat that with what will be remembered for its cure nearby in its head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the bowel or face, when it occurs between the shoulders and is located in the middle space, on the chest or under the arms, or on the face.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it's the impact of a lance or a club, and you gauge its depth, then consider more if there is wind flowing from the wound when the patient breathes; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent on its surface, then you should apply the first aid powder here, and don't use that for which it would retain the sanguine humor at the depth of the wound and return to the heart causing malaise, but instead leave an attractive ointment here, and cleanse those two washes a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at your disposal, then you should cover the wound's opening with a cloth to let out what comes from moisture; and make the patient lie on the wound so that what is contained flows.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If already three days or more have passed from the wound and no seizure or heart tremor occurs in the patient, nor does there occur a constriction of the veins, then consider that the wound is saved; and thereafter treat it with warm baths and all other good treatments until healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of your patient is excused and all time has passed, then know that a fistula has already formed; therefore treat it accordingly from its head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to incision of a space or from a club, and it's simple on the surface of the foot or two, then treat that with what follows before suture if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already formed pus in the bone, and your patient's bones are cut, then you should press the wound and take them out to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then smooth them inside until the wound discharges, for which the extraction of these becomes easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wound accidents in the other limbs, juvenile healing is what we have said about it.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or midway between them.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great ones, some washes will force out the intestine or nerves of the intestine, so that their introduction and suture are more vigorous and more refined.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And for small disruptions it is done in another manner, and I know that the return of them to their place is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introduction of them back to their place promptly, which opens up and swells so that the material of your patient becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is midway, where it's not difficult to return the intestine in that one, similarly as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that suture of the abdomen is according to four manners, but two stitches are common and apply in stitches of other wounds of the heart.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And there are two more stitches peculiar to these, but however they are even more peculiar in the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you to include every exposition and declaration in your instructions.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So state that when the wound is small and pushed by some cause of the intestine through it, making its reduction difficult, then this is in one of these two manners: or due to the minuteness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when it's like this, you should wet the skin with cold water or use a damp cloth dipped in hot water, or take one in cold water that sours, and mint, and you immerse the part of the intestine into which the swelling is present until the swelling resolves.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some washes do this very well in which there is astringency, and it's better than just water for resolving swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you want the swelling to resolve, then you soak the intestine with water in which garlic and almonds are placed, for this helps to alleviate your patient's material from a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If your patient's material is alleviated by this treatment, then break up the disruption with a small instrument where you have inserted needles.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it's adequate and isn't drying, without needing to dry in excess or cause deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, if its shape is such:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of its shape is rounded and sharp, while the other part is not acute, with a subtle tip, but not so subtle that it becomes blunt just a little bit.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and forces out of the intestine, you should know that its return should follow its natural form, in its proper place, if it's possible upon this, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on their back, placing their legs as close to their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then place your head and feet further than the parts left.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	When the disruption is in one of the two halves of the belly, then you should focus your understanding and consideration on that area so that the part with the trouble may be more than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus care for this in the major pains and in the minor pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small pains, use what you have prepared and make sure to let the person who administers it be among your most experienced. They should hold the wound entirely with their hand and adjust the lips of the wound. Additionally, place them close enough together so that each stitch is done closely followed by another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: when you take the needle or count the number of needles according to the size of the wound; then lay off from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle in one place, or another that you do not put your thread into both ends of the cord, at both ends of which is left the part within each other when you make it penetrate through that part; and you have added both ends of the cord and both ends of the thumb. Then you make four rows like this.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then hold the thread double in the circuit of the needle, and stitch together parts from both ends at the same time. Then add both lips and wound by adding in a decent manner; and adjust the thickness of the finger and place another needle there, and stitch that with thread as you would with the first needle. And don't stop doing this while threading the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be medium in hardness and delicacy; for delicate needles cut the flesh more easily. And thick ones are difficult to insert in the cord; thus it is wise that they should be medium in both delicacy and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And don't let the needle be placed at both ends of the thread far apart; for that way the flesh will not be cut too easily and the wound will heal in front of its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And don't let the stitches be too long so that the wound isn't hindered from healing properly.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so they don't penetrate too deeply into the patient's thigh and thus not allow them to bleed excessively; place powders that expand from all parts over the stitches, where you have the ends of the needles; leave them like this until you know the wound has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this method of using needle stitches is particularly suitable for small wounds, where you can often use just one or two needles around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second method of suturing involves this: you should administer the stitches with four ends, both ends of the thread and both ends of the thumb, in one go, using a needle where the thread is wrapped evenly in terms of delicacy and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have placed the needle through these four ends, return the needle from that part which started, so that the thread being pulled will not push up the other part towards the wound, making sure that the stitches are according to the sewing of cloth where the cloths are tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the thickness of your finger's breadth.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch I know how to do.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a stitch, I healed the wound that happened to a man in his belly which was torn by a rope, and it was an eruption of the major wound as large as a palm. It was situated inside about two palms from each side of my location; it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned that (the rope) after the wound had been penetrated for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in about fifteen days or so, and he healed it and became well; and then this kind of medicine worked with various remedies, and he recovered his health.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healing; and by miracle of fire, though I did not cure him with ointment, which was in a place where neither the ointment nor any medicine could be found, rather placed my hand like many times on the wound just twice each day and washed it vigorously with honey water, and that healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	I may tell you two types of stitching according to the story of Paul.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the needle of the stitch, and insert the needle from one part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so as the needle pierces the thread and within it enters points according to rectitude and length across all the body, let the end of the silk remain in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the thread from inside to outside in the other end of the fabric.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that piercing, then make another piercing in the same horizontal end of the fabric from outside to inside; let the end of the silk be which is here, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the fabric from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that piercing in the silk at which you have made that piercing in the fabric at the end of the thread, which is inside the patient where all of it should penetrate.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And from this horizontal side begin, pinching that at the end which is on the thread fabric at the other side, and remove the needle of the thread which penetrated, then pinch it in this thread and make the end of the thread which is on the other side opposite to this end of the fabric; and remove that from the thread which comes from the patient.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and repeat this with another piercing between which you sew all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the conclusion of this method of stitching is that you sew with thread on which you sew the skin, so that you sew the silk at the end of the fabric part, and let that other piercing remain until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of my own stitching that I call Gualia, according to its description and as recommended by others, is that you sew it according to its likeness on which some doctors sew it, so they add all parts to their corresponding part according to nature; and apply the end of another from them and the end of the fabric at the other end of them, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you hold the needle at your fingertips of the outside end, make that penetrate into the inside part in this single spot, and let two ends of the silk; then rotate the needle and have it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the silk.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And rotate each one of those, and make that penetrate into the inside part between the outside part in two ends of the fabric other than which are on this side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than the common lighter sewing, and it is stitching which has prior knowledge.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the description of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And as such, abdominal stitching is corrected with two needles, so you insert into these each one a thread, and begin by inserting the needle of what you are supposed to do, and have that penetrate inside the other side according to stitching on which they sew equalizing organs.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then this stitching is more difficult than from other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The treatment for wounds follows the treatment of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	This is the cause: when you obtain the wound fresh at its root before air alters it, and return the hernia and sew that properly, then place over it powdered meat.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if air has already altered the wound, then place over it such ointments which you have at your disposal so that they make hard peyra and take care of the threads, and let them solidify meat and fabric; and treat it in this way like the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if medicines are not at your disposal, then place over it immediately, since it starts to ooze pus, like milk, and change that twice a day as you have been taught, until it is healed, which you would not need other medicine in various situations when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the wound might spread to the main limbs, then when you immerse lion wool in oil of high quality, or in heated oil, place this over the area and leave it between the armpits and let these be.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or decay in its hernias, which happens with these days, then rub that with a black anticoagulant vinegar, and especially if the pus has spread inside the hernia and is caused by drainage penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that which comes from the larger hernia is a light pus for healing, while that which comes from finer hernias.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal which hernia that is called “gegunu” does not receive healing from wounds that affect it completely; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it and the magnitude that is within those, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you are dealing with is the fabric of the disease and successfully reach that layer, return that second one according to your judgment along which you reduce the hernias equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has entered the patient's space and turned either red or black, then you strengthen that on the spot where the damage was done, to allow for fluids of infection to come through, considering that in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And you should insert what is another layer of tissue underneath it, and place the two ends of the fabric hanging from the starting point of the disease area, so that you can be relieved of your concern about the patient's recovery. You must sew the fabric and release the discharge of the disease.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of diseases when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption happens in the intestine and is small, then it might be repaired in some people. This is why I saw that one who was hit in his abdomen by a spear had abdominal gangrene as an old condition causing fistula, and his pain and flatulence subsided.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	So I sought the treatment for him even though it wasn't treated in his healing process, but I found a way to heal it internally and the area becomes solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I noted the location that became solidified, observing over his body what happened due to that bad event in his abdomen; and not caused any further harm due to that bad accident and changed his diet and drinking habits. He then took baths and exercised according to my instructions.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when disease affects the intestine and is small, then one should cover it according to this method: you need to take large cabbages; next adjust the two edges of the diseased area, placing a piece of cabbage with an open mouth over those two edges. Then, when they are covering it, strengthen its mouth, cutting off its head, which sticks and doesn't dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And you should place another cabbage close to the first one, and do not stop doing this by placing cabbages one after another according to the amount of the whole diseased area.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And you should reduce that and cure the disease; remove those extra cabbages in the intestine until the intestine is cured; there should be no harm to the body due to this.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine can be treated with something subtle made from animal intestines which is thicker; and you need to take the end of those intestinal tubes, make them clean, place their ends near this tube, encasing them, then insert these tubes into needles and thread them through this area, reducing it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of sewing with cabbages is merely following a path of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the disease is large and wide, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, then it can't just be treated with refinement; it doesn't treat the entire body.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Regarding the treatment of wounds and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Knowing that all diseases and pus form when they become old and hardened, causing ulcers, which do not heal or release fluid continuously, so, in any part of the body, it is universally named a fistula, and we call that one 'wound'.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A true fistula is a tightly packed nodule, hard, white, not painful, and where one can feel it as if feeling the skin of an animal; thus, that particular region is named 'penis'.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it exists in some people who are wet, which releases fluid; and if the moisture is strong, it can be released within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And in some cases this wetness turns into pus, which is little and thick, but subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already explained in the division, as I said about diseases, that every ulcer which is not healing or is not in naked flesh, is so for one of these reasons: among which one reason could be due to lack of blood within the body; or it might be due to malice of the person; or where there's a barrier between them and their flesh preventing natural growth of flesh; or it might be because of pus formation; or when that ulcer itself contains poison and the substance that is causing harm inside the body is of bad quality; or if medicine is not suitable for treating this issue; or when corruption sets in in certain regions, which causes pestilence; or due to regional properties like what happens in Saragossa where it becomes difficult to digest maladies and pus-related issues are delayed due to their nature in healing. Or there might be bone(s) inside them or bones(m).
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all those causes, their symptoms and the treatment with medicines as explained in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	So this is how I will teach you the treatment of a fistula which is made through surgical operation using my knowledge.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Knowing that fistula can occur in any part of the body; some are caused by veins and arteries, nerves, bladder, intestine, or in proximity to major limbs and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among these types of fistulas that occur due to difficulties in healing and not receiving treatment, the management of such cases is a challenge due to lack of knowledge and skills.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is concerning one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach to these places that were mentioned, and you wait and trust in the patient's recovery while hoping for knowledge about this, then try methods like burning or cutting; and if the fistula follows a straight path, then explore it with your hand.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a subtle lead method, which is where lead from the patient's body is lifted and curved against the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has no movement or is silent, it isn't within your capacity to operate on it with this method.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the opening by your openings, through which the moisture for cleansing that thing will flow from the other openings and go out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire carefully, according to the manner by which you are capable of knowing if there are bones or nerves here, and whether it is a distant or local cavity. Or this is a fistula with multiple openings and covers all your strength, through your questioning of the patient, by which you question the sick person, and the knowledge of the pain should be by your pressure on the body, resembling the meanings and causes of complications in pus.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have assessed all those causes at the truthful station, then proceed with treatment according to confidence: it is that you consider this, whether the fistula appears nearby or in the place of exhalation, distant from joints, or from nerves, or an artery, or a vein, or any other location which I have mentioned and told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula as was described in its narration for the patient's case, and maintain this until there is drainage from the putrefied flesh and whatever has emerged from that opening in the meat or any part of it, and cure that inside where it has healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of distant depth and follows a straight path, then dig it until it reaches as far as you can, and adjust that to remove all its putrefied flesh; and also administer hot ointments wrapped in sharp remedies, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this by making some incisions inside where the acute medicine will erode all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to putrefaction.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that with ointments which generate healthy flesh where it has healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it does not heal through this method, then you apply the cautery according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must confirm this, then inquire about it and dry it as we have recommended. If you do not prohibit any cause of a vein or nerve or main member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is revealed to you and there is putrefaction and blackness in the patient, then you must cut into that where all the putrefaction has been located. And then heal it by promoting the growth of flesh inside so that it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and behaves like that as before, then you realize that you have not achieved the total eradication of the putrefaction; and thus, you reveal to yourself about this again thoroughly, and take care of your own strength by performing the operation on this second time, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, then well done; and otherwise, you realize that this putrefaction is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and thus for that one, it's merely to leave that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is rotten and small, or it is within your capability to pull it out, then you perform this action using fine tongs suitable for that task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is bones, then carefully make the extraction of all those, and from this do not leave any cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if it encounters any cause of moisture resistance and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then you cut those ligaments or tissues if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you are not prepared to stay with the bones of your time, then pause over that wound so that that wound remains in it, and leaves it within the vicinity of those bones and ligaments, and prevents the wound from hardening, and ensures the closure of the section that you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	But if you fear, pause over the cut submerged in heated oil, or the cut submerged in Egyptian ointment, or any other kind of ointment with vertigo, so that when these ligaments are released and the bones are separated from each other, this extraction is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it's a large bone like the bone of a rib or thigh bone or such, and what from you is corrupted is only the flesh of this person, then cut that just behind where that blackness and corruption is located, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	And if what from you is corrupted is a large portion, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it's necessary to close this and all that incision into the location where the corruption has been achieved, and then heal that once it's hardened.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what happens in a person during their thigh, that you pause this according to the example and assistant on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Translate the first sentence into English:
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then, throughout the time of this treatment based on the error of doctors until the abscess is opened, and corrections are made to his moving parts, his cure was carefully carried out while the change was forming into a fistula, and operations were performed on the pus orifices which all led to drainage and body moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the extensive treatment by doctors lasted for two years, and I did not know much about it until I was called in.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the change in him and the fluids that flowed from his those orifices through large veins; and already, the body of that man was completely hardened and his color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a tube into one of those orifices and conducted the treatment to the mouth.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then, I examined all those orifices closely and found that they were connected from every part of the body.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I carefully cut and incised into one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, and removed that decayed material; it was already rotten and decayed, and deteriorated; and it had decayed a part of the body within which it had reached into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I made preparations for what was revealed to me that pertained to the discovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I checked that it was not within the bone but rather that corruption which caused and led to decay, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I proceeded with the long-term restoration of the wound using consolidative medicine, but it did not consolidate properly.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeatedly examined and rediscovered on the bone following the initial discovery, and continuously found decay on the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I carefully removed what appeared to be from that decay, and then proceeded to thoroughly prepare for the treatment and restoration of him, but it was not restored properly.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another vein and did not stop gently drilling into the bone little by little, performing the restoration of him, but it was not restored until I drilled around one palm's distance away, and extracted from his marrow, and then restored that with medicines; it consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for repetition in the operation of this and section of him but due to the position of his nerves and the limited tolerance of his pain and fear of death, which would happen to him at all times from overabundance of evacuation leading to a bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore, health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard bone flesh; good positioning for him has been made within his body and virtue returns to him; he is consulted about his positions and does not do anything against his movements or injury under any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If there is an opening in the body already made in the chest area, then follow this method to proceed:
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or table in front of the bone reasonably, so when you do this, it's not forbidden to use the saw that doesn't cut through the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And know that the saw should be used on the corrupted area little by little; if it is in the concavity of the rotten bone and does not appear in its manifestation when touched, force the opening of another vein.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is rotten and not prominent, before it continues to one side from the other, where the decay is in the middle or part of him, then you must expose all the flesh everywhere; and place a stick in front, and proceed to cut through the first part until there's decay inside which should continue sawing on the next part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the sawing according to the location of the decay as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the decay is in the joint, cut into that decayed joint and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the decay is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not directly in him but in between.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the decay is in the palm of your hand or chest area, it's very difficult; however, know where the decay appears to you in which manner and once you've identified that, expose it, then proceed according to each position possible for you, and adjust every tool towards you as long as they don't oppose veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the drills and saws to drill and saw these bones depending on the position of the bones, their preparation, their size, their subtlety and grandeur or smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so be aware that you prepare for every type of operation suitable instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation means to you about the specifics of the tool you would need; when you have great study and long experience with the methods of this art, and testimony from methods used in treating illnesses, if you have already done these operations for yourself, then place what is convenient according to each tool for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will show you at the end of this chapter the number of tools that you will use, as well as those for which you will follow your prohibition which you will experience on the others.
Forma de serra:	Saw shape:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a lancet:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this lancet should follow the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points should follow the shape of the points almond-shaped.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it should only be that at those parts friction is applied to the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or that there is a large wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger razors of others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller razors:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the side razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another well-made saw: it should have an arc above the pus and the sharpness of its iron, and the member of its handle is to be made decently descending.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the razor with a hollowed-out area:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-ended razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small razors resembling those of spiders:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of saw-teeth that cut the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutting tool:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting tool; this is similar to a saw, and its end resembles a blade, and it is exhibited in various locations along the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of the lancet which should be as fine as those that penetrate through the bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly hollowed like all the causes that we have said about razors, cutting tools, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the tip of the incision and of the joint's lock.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The tips either press or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with the curative action of those medicines and the cure doesn't take effect, or sometimes the corruption must be removed from the member which you haven't been able to press against any cause. In this case, hollow out that member inside your incision so that the disease can access it, for the patient's recovery may come through this means, or by a misfortune that is greater harm than the original malady of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of where you are affecting is that the limb becomes black inside which should be red, or you bring the blackness into that part of the limb that affects it and consumes it entirely in the body; then continue with your incision at this point.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if it is due to the effect of certain poisonous causes like that of a marine scorpion or sea worm or ratel and their equivalents.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the impact is in the extremity of that finger, then you cut into the finger and do not allow space for the corruption to enter your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it reaches your hand, then you cut that part of the inside of the wrist, and do not allow space for the corruption to enter in the elbow of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it affects that area, then cut into the arm towards the armpit at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes elsewhere and often around the armpit, then that is death for the patient; administer another cause to counter this in treatment is an abundance of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do with the chest when corruption affects that part of the chest; then you cut there towards one of the nipples.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it penetrates into the sternum of the chest, then you cut all of the chest.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if it extends into the diaphragm, then you cut through the lung at the junction of the diaphragm.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached beyond the diaphragm, then in this case it's only release and leaving the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting or sawing the limb is this: you tighten one piece of muscle at the part you wish to cut, and place another piece of muscle over it. Extend your assistant's hand with one piece of muscle towards the remaining parts, and extend their hand with another piece towards that area; then separate the flesh which lies between two muscles so that all the flesh is exposed without a gap; and then proceed to cut or saw.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And make sure that a piece of the skin is laid out from all sides in such a way that it doesn't touch the area being cut, and that the injury comes to the patient's wound properly sized and with a pus blister.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, then you cauterize the area carefully, or place some powder that intensifies blood on it; and proceed to your treatment until it's completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, lay the injured limb under the muscle in such a way that it's comfortable, and treat it so that it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to watch out for what happens in his foot, this is an unfortunate event that I have advised both to you and myself, which often occurs in him with darkness in his foot, due to the assembly being akin to fire's combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption happens first in his right hand inside which extends throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for the doctor to drain pus because the healing tends towards the body with the force of its pain and the heat of his body, and he incises that foot into the joint, and heals it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time this corruption event has been happening in his right hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it befalls to me, and I proceed to feel the excess on what is placed above my hand of the medicines, close to the transformation of the body; and the excess does not revert, but begins to spread into the other hand where it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asks me to incise my hand on him, and I do not want to do this fearing the effect of that excess, rather I dread the incision of his hand's death, for the virtue of the patient was upon disease.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he recovers from me, he returns to his land and informs me that this man prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and he healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not recounted this story merely for the sake of assistance in understanding this kind of illness, and its meaning is ascribed to it according to which it is understood and by which it is performed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the treatment of sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When gangrene affects the flesh of certain parts and the space of the gangrene is prolonged, it collects pus. Then it bursts and pierces, allowing the pus to escape from him, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel. The cloth that covers this, like a fine sheet, does not reach deeper corruption, nor spreads into bones or nerves, or inside the body cavity; such an area is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged so that corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to incise that sheet completely as if it were being twisted, especially when it's fine and done like a cloth, and make sure you don't stick it due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the sheet will stick and that this corruption hasn't reached by subsequent consequence, then your treatment is with an enema in the sheet.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and if it's large, the arm that smells of fat, then administer an Egyptian enema using medicine made from oil, vinegar, and wine, with equal parts taken in a container, and they are heated over fire until the medicine is cooked and reaches honey-like consistency.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from him and dissolve it in water and honey; administer this to the sinus, strengthen his opening, and let the medicine rest in him for about two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you extract that with precision; do this for several days until the sinus is healed and his shame is restored.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some times an enema is made with ash water when you don't have this medicine at your disposal; so take the ash of wood, mix it with water; then drink that and administer it as an enema until you notice that the sinus has stopped.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient doesn't tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed with wine that has been strained, and do the same with wine and honey mixed. Honey's property is to transform and cleanse, while wine makes the sinus stick more so when there is excess of coagulation and dryness in it.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this for a few days and notice that the sinus has healed, then administer an enema with what causes meat to birth in him.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take from the dyafinicon ointment and dissolve that in rubbed oil and vinegar; or you administer this as an enema with some medicines and other ointments which have the properties I have already written about in the book on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus opening is narrow where you can't insert the catheter of the enema, then gradually enlarge it with a small piece of metal, and rest in him covered in Egyptian ointment or basilicum ointment until it's enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the opening is wide, then you add his cheeks with suture and leave him the quantity in which the enema fits.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of him from which the arm flows is elevated to his parts above, then dry that at the lowest point where it's in him so that the arm can flow down. For when the arm is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the meat will be produced in him.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it's not possible to dry the sinus inside near the bone at the lowest point as you wish, then perforate it in preparation for the member so that the arm flows slightly from him according to your ability and ensures there is no obstruction of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medicines that are placed over the appropriate sinus where you want to extend those above the patient's skin.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And let the sheet be of such size that it facilitates communication with all parts of the sinus; then cut across the edges of the opening in the sinus with a larger incision than the sinus opening. And extend over another part of the patient's skin with anointed cloths according to the size of the incision, and place this cloth far from the sinus opening so that the motion of the arm is not restricted and does not damage the large sheet only after several days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that be over the opening of the sinus, which you enlarge at all times to ensure that it does not restrict the motion of the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you can know whether what flows from the arm is a lot or little, if it's being digested, or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also always consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it's in pus.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in such manner, you observe the matter that's being discharged over the sinus opening has adhered or approaches adherence; then you let it be for a day or two. When you remove the dressing, change the sheet and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that if there's ample space close to the sinus where viruses are subtle, do not waste over the adherence of it, for the healing process is taking hold in him; this applies to certain individuals who have a delayed response in their bodily wounds and those who undergo the opposite procedure.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the arm is indigest for several days close to the sinus, then you understand that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus takes time and becomes prolonged, then adjust in drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are moistened in their substance and in their effectiveness, they are dried as well into a beeswax form, when there's excess addition of oil in it.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy for what is being treated comes from beeswax ointment that's dissolved in roasting oil, and is applied as much as needed on it, and you place this near them, use this.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when there's no arm, beeswax ointment and honey, when mixed inside the wound cause it to swell, use this; or take myrrh and aloes and ground these, mix them with honey on a flame, then place this near the sinus; and place this with honey that has been mixed inside causing swelling, grind this further into powder onto linen, strengthen this over the sinus;
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered to you from the aristocracy of long speech and wisdom (and this is heavenly lily) and flour from earthworms and centaurian, use these simple remedies or adjust them, grind those finely and sift into honey as I've recommended; and use this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and isn't healed by this cure, then you know that corruption is within him, and it has already inquired into bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you heal it with a tuberculous treatment, as previously mentioned.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	From the treatment of eruptions and nail scraping, and addition to finger cuts, and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Apanarici is an eruption which doesn't let the nail of the said foot or hand die out, and strengthens in other digits too; and when it's prolonged and its treatment is costly, it either becomes a pus-filled eruption, or turns corrupt, and you immerse your arm so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and you strengthen the corruption all over, and spread its corruption into the bone where its odor smells rotten, and cut off the extremity of said side, and the color of it is made black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that as we've discussed in the division and don't confirm your cure, then consider that you must cut off all excess that has gathered under the nail and proceed with burning the wound near it, where burning is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	May it be if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the projections of the nail have already encompassed the flesh towards the divisions inside, they start piercing it and guide this way, then consider that you should pause at the delicate part leaving a subtle angle under the nail that pierces the flesh, push this further into it with ease and cut through that flesh gently, pause on what remains of the flesh from the use of burning corrosive medicines until all is sufficiently enlarged; then proceed to heal this with ointments until it's healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May it be if corruption has already spread into the bone, then consider that you must cut out the bone at that point and remove it, because there is no healing when the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe the corrosion and corruption spreading into that digit, then consider cutting it at one of the joints according to how its memory is pressed, and proceed to heal this once it's healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	May it be if there's pressure or injury to the nail, and if that pain is severe, then consider doing bloodletting at the onset near the foot, and proceed to dry the nail with an acute blade on a crosswise section above in juice; see to it that the drying doesn't reach into the flesh left behind by the nail, for this would cause severe pain in the foot, and results in the formation of excessive tissue adjustment in that place; then proceed to heal that area according to what relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	A disease that often appears in some men, it makes their flesh very thin and weak, and also weakens their bones or weakens their nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Such things are inherent in the nature of the joints, or it is the natural state for them in some of their joint's anatomy.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that occurs naturally in some joints is not harmful, whereas the one that happens in joints making them weak is harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are fleshly, the section is slight; you should make an incision there to its proper depth.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	As for the one that occurs in the depth of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful with cutting it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	As for the one that occurs naturally in the joint, take care with the joints; when you make your incision, do it at the beginning of the bone, and carefully cut into it with a round-edged blade, then proceed to cure it so that it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation which occurs among joints due to their movements or by nature of the body that grows in this manner, or through the consolidation from disease or fire burn, or due to deformities; when this consolidation occurs within the joints, make sure it is cured so they return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And between their layers apply oil that has been rubbed for not to consolidate lightly, and separate them among each other or place a thin layer of lead under where it should be consolidated as you go.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain joints on the palm, then you dry that consolidation as it is prepared and conforms to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From incisions made by tools, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	The tools create varicose veins, which are large, full of melancholic excesses. These occur in the joints of the body's members, and their greatest manifestation is often on the chest area, but especially for those who travel, work, or carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer black cholera's heart purge to produce strong evacuations in some of them, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of their black blood is according to two methods: one is to make an incision and remove that dark blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it all.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is according to this method: embrocate at the beginning with hot water and salt into the joint until the thick blood dissolves, which becomes fluid in the joint, then strengthen the patient's knee up to the top of their thigh under the joint, and lift your hand holding the vein above where it leaves the joint on both sides, and dry the black blood at a place or in two, or three with wide sections, and lift the black blood to your waist inside and above it, until you extract the desired amount of blood, which will take away the essence of the knee.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then guide him to that point and command him to avoid foods that cause black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and you notice in the knee area.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them is according to this method: you should warm the knee by rubbing it if there are joints on your knee, and then immerse it in hot water while applying hot water to the joint until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or it can be exercised with vigorous exercise if bathing is not available, as long as the member is scraped.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And dry the leg at the right of the vein by section along its length or at the back of it, or at the lowest part of it you should remove the knee, or at the lowest point of it you should remove the foot.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And cut the leg with scissors and clean out the vein from all sides until you feel it, and you should observe the appearance of it which resembles that redness turning to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore, as soon as you have evacuated and from the leg you take that white which is like a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place those ends of it inside so that they are elevated and hanging from the leg, and suspend them in a bucket or a lion's skin.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three fingers, and scrape the leg from the part above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and make an incision at the very last section which should reach to the foot, and then extract it and lift it until you can see through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Do that until you extract it from the section which is more prominent or another of all sections, so that everything can be seen; then make an incision there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you don't follow to extract and lift it, then insert a strong double-thick needle there and pull out the string, or insert your thread there and twist your hand in all directions so that it hangs.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And make sure not to make an incision; if it breaks, you will have difficulty lifting that movement and it will become problematic for the knee due to that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once all that has been taken out is hanging down, then place over the site of the wound wool soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil and un-rubbed oil, and cure it so that it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the body is contracted with curvature in which it is enveloped in its parts, and does not follow straightness as we have said, then cut that wherever you find curvature and the places of envelopment of the body, and suspend that with threads under which lift that completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And when you should have your section, make sure not to invade the vein and do not trouble that area; it will be difficult for you to lift that. Use caution in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision at which the body is closed:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a thread cut:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as heated to the patient as to nails nor does it have a sharp tip so as not to irritate the vein; and it has great flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut into the vein due to its subtlety; having said that, it should be in excess of the normal size as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Regarding the extraction of the crural vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs at the lower parts, like Al-Ategi in the desert areas of Arabs and in the dry southern lands of India where little vegetation can exist, and there neither grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And in other parts of the body, it is generated elsewhere like the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the origin of this is decay that leaves you, like poison within the body snake-like and worms and maggots and parasites causing decay between the poison and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of anticipation for this occurrence is that this vein, in the leg inflamed; and when you see it blistered; and nearby begins the vein departure from the site of that blisters, as if from a plant's root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see the extremity come out, then take care to place upon that a piece of lead whose weight is equal to one drachm; within two drachms, and immerse it and flatten the lead suspended from the abdomen.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And for as many times as the veins of your patient cause to appear outside the parts, wrap this in lead and guide that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the movement is prolonged, then you should incise a part of it and wrap the rest; do not incise that right away from its end which would be outside, for if you incise that, it contracts and enters the flesh causing pus formation and inflammation in that place and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And when you should have it treated gently and be extracted little by little, so that it is pulled out from the rear of its body and not dragged by any cause within the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein is found in some people that extends up to their waist length and has surpassed me, as I have incised one measuring twenty hands.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during its treatment process, then insert the needle into the patient's vein and pierce that inside long vein in the body, so that all that exists within the material is evacuated, and administer decay to that area with some days worth of medicines; and then treat that for the healing of pus.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has ramps in it, and mostly when it appears at the chest junction or on the chest, it creates openings in the patient, and it is found coming out of any of those opening branches.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that as we have said in division and for what was mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section on removing worms generated under the skin, it is called cattle sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some regions as cattle sickness due to the fact that many times in cattle, there are worms which have a little length and it's body is found between the poison and flesh, and it travels throughout the whole body upwards and downwards, and it becomes evident by feeling their presence in each part of the body as they break through the skin and protrude.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from decay of some fluids like the occurrence of worms, snakes, earthworms and hookworms in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is found due to the cunning of this disease, when it goes into the body and rises to the head, then a strong lead comes in it and enters and destroys the head, and thus there are many times veins.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to treat and extract that, it should not be done unless you observe its movement and appearance at your touch, then cut where you find this above it and what is left of it firmly, and then dry it over it and extract.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is spread in the flesh and does not adhere, then you pause with a cautery from fire on the spot where it lives, and the main cause that is feared is decay of it as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if it goes into the head near the forehead, then press firmly on the upper eyelid with strong constriction, and then dry over it, and extract; cut where·the patient uses to change their body with medicines that evacuate putrid bad fluids, and guard against foods causing decay.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the treatment of cattle sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named as 'nafir' in our land, and it's pain that appears in some limbs, and then spreads from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have seen this twice, which I will now describe.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to assist a sick woman in a town, and I found her arm swollen slightly along the spinal vein of the arm. After an hour when it was inflamed, I saw that swelling go away as if it were moving up towards this area, somewhat faster than water, like silver flowing from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that area increased and settled into the muscle, it stayed here for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then moves on to the other side across which extends to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was told to observe it moving throughout her entire body as I saw, it was too astonishing for me regarding the exchange and speed between limb and limb.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my patients according to that manner, but I have seen movements where the pain is being exchanged from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	However, I did not see it like this in my patients as I did with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider it to be like this simply because the woman was elderly, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this case arose that sensation of circulating breeze.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear in this manner for those who are delicate and have wet skin with swollen veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want the cure of them, and the patient feels that pain, then it does not appear as visible in this way as we have said. So, strengthen there, slightly hold the patient down, make it a little wet at that point where there is that sensation of circulating breeze, and cauterize that area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	However, if you do not see it in your patients, then you heal that at the point of chest release and at what you are expelling breeze, make those pills stinky and those pills of sulfur and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are differentiated according to species and the locations within the body where they lodge. Their diversity lies in their varying sizes - large and small, concave and flat, soft or hard. Some have three angles, while others have tongues and points.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the arrow, depending on where it is found in the limbs and body parts (such as the head, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, kidneys), it follows two ways: when they are main limbs or concave like these organs; just as in cases of fatal injuries to these body parts you may see signs of death, which I will describe shortly. Here, take care not to extract that arrow from those where death occurs due to injury within the most vital areas. However, if you do not notice such symptoms and the arrow is not buried deep in the limb, then you should remove it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the symptoms related to the skull, when it's hit by the arrow and pierces the bones above the head, causing severe nausea, blindness, dizziness, abdominal pain in patients, swelling and inflammation on their tongues, spasms and confusion affecting one's understanding, vomiting due to diarrhea, a feeling of weakness spreading from the affected area accompanied by dehydration symptoms akin to bodily fluids.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you notice these symptoms, then refrain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow if it is not protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, if it's close to the left breastbone and feels like it's stuck in a hard place, not visible. The movement of the arrow resembles that of the wrist, and there is a dark infection at the wound site; it causes coldness at the extremities and chills, fainting. Therefore, know that death descends completely from head to toe.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The signs when the arrow has pierced the lung include a sense of gushing blood at the wound site, and vessels near the neck are swollen. The patient's complexion changes color, they start to gasp for large breaths, and they request air to be forced into their lungs.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the abdominal cavity within the legs, the pain is close to the small ribs, it causes a huge intense pain and sighing, and not all parts of the leg muscles are involved.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then there is a sense of discomfort and indigestion at the wound site.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the belly and is stuck there, there's a sense of some wound opening at the site, or tissue, or hernia which has been disrupted; in such cases, there's no hope for treating the injury by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine starts flowing out, causing discomfort to the patient; if it's expelled from the body in any way, know that this is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And for the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulders and auxiliary muscles, the backbones of both sides, the ribs, breastbone, waist, thighs, and their corresponding parts in these limbs, are preserved according to the most vital positions when the arrow doesn't hit a vein or artery and isn't venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will share with you what I have observed about these arrows, so that you may understand their significance in treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This causes when in a man there is an arrow wound on the eyelid of his eye and extending into the base of his nose, if one removes that from him from the other side, leaves behind the ear wax of him, and then he heals, and does not get hurt again at his nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And when in a Jew there is another arrow wound that hits him on his nose within the ear wax, leave behind the eyelid and it, and the arrow was already hidden so it could not be found from that except for a small tip at which it adhered to its shaft; it was a large arrow among the arrows of the sharp Turks, made of iron without any ear wax.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it is about a Jew, and does not hurt at his nose in case of bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And when it comes to removing another Christian arrow that is stuck in the shoulder blade, and it is an Arab arrow, that is the one with ear wax; then I penetrate through this between two guide pins, and it was already submerged in the shoulder blade of him; then I sharpen this, and then extract this completely, and then the Christian heals.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And remove another arrow from a man that was stuck in his belly, and considered that it would cause death by this; then, since I passed thirty days without any change on him due to any reason, penetrate through the arrow and apply a needle over this, and he heals, and does not get hurt in case of bad accident afterwards.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom there is an arrow wound on his back, and the disease has solidified on him, and since it was about seven years, remove the arrow from the base of his foot.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom there is an arrow wound in her belly, and the disease has solidified inside her, and it does not change with any of her natural operations, and the woman does not get hurt during any of her normal procedures.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man to whom there is an arrow on his face, and the disease has solidified and removed the arrow, not causing any pain or similar symptoms here.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And remove the arrow from the king's prince's man who was stuck in the middle of his nose, and it had begun to descend on the right side slightly, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment around three days after being hit by the arrow.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I checked the wound of the arrow injury; and then I probed around the tip of the needle tentatively, but did not feel that; however, he felt it clearly on his right earlobe, and so I realized that that point was at the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I treated the area with stimulating and digestive ointment, confirming to me that this place should be rubbed where there is magnetic attraction, so that it appears to me the place of the arrow, so that it works on that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it does not happen in significant accidents that you have hit the arrow at this place; I continue to apply the ointment on him for many days and no accident happens; while the disease consolidates, and then removes the pain from his face for several days until I feel the arrow inside his nose again and report this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I place a quick-corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it boils open, and with this probe, I examined that, and felt the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that quick medicine until it visibly appeared to me the tip of the arrow, and passed this time over that period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound expanded, and became possible for me to insert the scissors into him, I shortened it, and did not give in to impatience, then I no longer continued to sharpen and apply on that with various tools over time until one day about this began using forceps hanging methods according to what comes out of their shape at the end of the head, when I removed this; and then restored this wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors thought that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, and I restored this and the wound consolidated. The face healed completely, and there is no pain in him for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you on the quality of removing some arrows for which you should consider this rule and significance about what I have not mentioned, that are understood neither in writing nor can they be comprehended freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans wisely compare on few matters; and about what is presented compared to what is absent; and finds a new operation and a new tool should be used when you are dealing with foreign causes of the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore, I say that arrows are not thrown outside the parts where they are located but according to two ways: or by penetration into the place where they enter; or by contrary of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is thrown from the place goes in, or if it is an arrow coming from a meaty place, it is shot and thrown outside.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not listen to the sense of when you catch it, then cover that until a few days where the meat around him should settle down, and relieve the penetration and his exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it's found in the abdomen and doesn't respond to your decisions, then let it rest for a few days and repeat this process with attention and movement every day, and soon it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it doesn't respond to your decisions for a few days, then consider that you are piercing in the circuit of the arrow in that part of the body from all directions through a subtle area where the place is expanded by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has proceeded into one of the chambers of the brain, causing those accidents which I described earlier, then refrain from removing the arrow and let it stay where its existence equals that period for a few days; however, if the arrow penetrates to the spinal column, then death will not be prolonged for them.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck in the body of the bone only and does not penetrate to the spinal column, but remains in the head for a few days, and nothing happens to them due to those accidents, then you should proceed with the extraction of the arrow and its removal.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is moving and doesn't respond to your removal, then you administer journeys in the circuit of the arrow as we have prescribed, and then care for the area so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is already hidden in the body's location, and hidden from feeling, then you inquire about it with temptation, and if you feel it, then pull it with such strokes that are convenient for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot over it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the stick, and here there are no bones or nerves or veins, then pierce into the wound where it is expanded and it's possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it's in the fatty tissues where it's stuck from all directions throughout your reach; and work on this, if you cannot remove the flesh in the fracture of the fats or when twisting them as desired.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps from all directions where it makes that obey; and delicately with subtle subtlety so that the arrow isn't broken and is done in a way that makes its removal and the extraction difficult for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that in your own time, then let it rest for a few days within which the parts that are in the circuit of it will subside, and then repeat this when it's relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it causes you opposition in the flow of blood, then administer that which we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue from the beginning of vein or nerve or cord, and apply skill in every possible way to remove the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and strength as I have advised you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore make the arrow bend according to its own way that the patient's head follows the figure according to which you should place the position of the arrow in them, which is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this isn't within your capability, then administer what is within your capacity according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And for arrows that are expelled in the opposite direction of their normal course, or which have already proceeded into some parts from the outside ones, or if there is an inclination towards the extremity of the arrow due to the sensation of the part further than the knee joint, then you should act on that; and choose the section according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken; then pull it, as it's done with deliberation.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you twist the hand according to opposition within which the arrow starts penetrating into the bone, and expand yourself, and then pull out that one.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, let it rest for a few days, and then repeat this inside where it burns.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the stem of the arrow is in that one, then you push it towards them.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the stem is broken and you want to administer thrusting, then you insert it into that one, if it's deaf, strike a concave shape so that it enters the cavity of them into the tail of the arrow, and then push that towards them.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then you push it with strong thrusting entering that one, where the arrow is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is contaminated, then consider that you hollow out all the flesh in which the wound is present, if this is within your capability, and then care for it as what is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow penetrates into the legs, or into the belly, or in the bladder, or on the side, and is near enough that you can touch it with temptation, then touch it when possible. Then touch it, preserve yourself from touching veins or nerves, extract that one, and then smooth over the wound if needed, care for it so that it gets healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them be like a duck's bill, which are made like a saw when they grip the arrow so that they don't let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And among those are formed special spots, large, few and mixed, depending on the quantity of the arrow's size and its relative weakness, as well as the extent of the wound, and the constriction around it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the concave propelling at this extremity is thus like that of a thorn for one to ease the passage of the arrow in him, and the push of that deafening sound:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the propelling object at this deafening extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus like a ray for one to ease the passage within him in the concave arrow and it is propelled towards that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy which usually one is accustomed to perform at .xxx,. of which it is in the chapter XVI, those are the two pulsating veins which are near the ears, they're called alhasisain; two herbs that appear in both temples; and two veins that are visible under the eyes; and two guideveins at the neck; and two veins that are above the lips; and two veins that are below the lips; and - these are the veins called algelic; and those are two veins that drain the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are phlebotomized in the elbows are .v., Among those is one cephalic, which is under the wild heart; and the people call it "the head vein", and silently, and it's a mixed vein, made of a branch of basilica, and another branch of cephalic; and they name that the people "vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that's placed in the domestic heart, and named "flashing", and call that the vulgar ones "vein of the belly"; and the artery of the arm, it's placed over the wrist, and that's where phlebotomy is performed, and that one appears above the elbow through manifest appearance; and the save all, it's the vein between what was mentioned auricular and the small pus named, and are in both ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the chest and under the arm there are three veins; one of those is that leaves the curve of the base of the wild heart. And the second is sophena, its location is under the bend of the domestic heart's elbow; and sciatic vein, its place is under the bend of the wild heart's elbow; and in the arm pit they have other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youth of the veins that are near the ears is cataris old, and emigranea and sahafati and ulceracious of old bad head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of this is according to what I recommend to you: it's that there be a redness on the head of the patient, and to rub the head of the patient at the back of the neck in the place between both veins with ample cloth for good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck by having them bend their head within which two appear close to the ears at two prehistoric spots on the head; and touch that one with your hand, and if you feel the pulse of those ones with your hand here test.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Approach you take the surgical lance, and that is the one that slants downward, approach you insert those veins into the main artery where phlebotomy leads to the heart.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And approach you lift your hand at the vein and main artery to the upper parts, then cut the vein starting from where it slants downward.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And make the length of the cut equal to that of two fingers or slightly more than that; and drain out the blood as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And afterwards strengthen with powders, leave that until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already in the introduction of this book, we have described the incision and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The youth of those two arteries which are at the temples, for phlebotomy, is ancient emigranea, malicious and frequent, ophthalmia, and nose bleeding due to excesses.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: strengthen the patient's neck by having them bend their head within which two veins appear through manifest appearance, and show your hand on the pulse of each one at that spot; and then you test it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And approach you raise the main artery above the vein to the spots on your indicated hand, and insert the phlebotomy slanting downward there, and lift the vein in its place; then cut that like you did with those other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And approach you relieve the constriction of the neck, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place that part in a powdery way with strength, strengthen it above with firmness, and leave that until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already described have been their memories, and the incision of those, and the extraction in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the youth of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic artery in relation to the old face ailments, emigranea, fever and malodorous ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy for this is according to what I recommend to you: it's that the neck be strengthened by having them bend their head in such a way that the vein appears; and then take the tool which is called the fossor, whose form is as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point of your instrument at the prominent part which is at the head of the wound over that vein, strike it on that area either straight or with some angle in your hand's position, and let the bleeding flow as much as you desire; then release the perforation under the patient's thigh and strengthen that area for healing.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes, the operation is performed at the site of blood withdrawal on the leg, but it's not that a common method like other blood withdrawals, which are made at the outer extremity similar to all others, before being positioned towards the inner extremity. The blood withdrawal there goes across, where the bone is close and makes the withdrawal easy when the tool is sharp enough.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Let the young of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes by way of discharge through the eye due to snot and acne on the face, and for the cheeks.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of blood withdrawal is that the thigh strengthens its fold under one bend, and then withdraws blood from those areas, and you stand above the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And when blood withdrawal is performed across from the longitudinal direction for a few with a few needles in the location where there's not meat; and if the needle is sharp, its tip breaks.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And let the bleeding flow as much as is necessary for you, press on those areas, strengthen them with one night, and release those afterwards.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Let the blood withdrawal from the vein of the nose be related to acute fever and intense heat, as well as for the thighs on the face and migraine that occur on the face, especially when it's old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of blood withdrawal is that the thigh strengthens its fold and then places it on your left hand, takes the needle which is long and fine, puts that in the middle location of the nose according to right direction, where the vein does not appear here and when bleeding starts to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Make sure to finish your hand at the small needle gradually and let the blood flow according to your needs; and release that for one night, because that is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Let the young of blood withdrawal affect both limbs and start the leprosy, as well as for the bad leg ulcers and corrosive diseases like scabies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of blood withdrawal from those is that the thigh strengthens each one in its fold with tension; and let the surgeons be on top of the thigh, and the thigh should be resting on a seat.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And let blood withdrawal take place along the long vein with ample needles gradually; and release the bleeding according to temperature quantity or according to what necessity you desire; and let it seem like the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the tension and strengthen both veins with a mild compression so that the thigh doesn't get infected, and leave it until the morning when the illness is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Let the young of blood withdrawal from veins in the alveolar region correspond to small abscesses and pustules on the mouth, gum deterioration, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and around your face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of blood withdrawal from those is that you sharpen your thigh in front of you and strengthen its fold with one bend, then rotate each of the lips and look at both veins; the first being on the right side of the lip and the second on the left side. The demonstration for each is by the darkness of each on both sides, especially when they are located within the circuit of those small black veins; so you cut each one with an incision that goes inwards.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubt and don't know which one of them is, then you understand through the incision of the largest among those, and the evident pus from those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And let it resemble the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It's customary to cut more when you're incising the two veins that are located on the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are located at the back of your tongue correspondingly prepare for blood withdrawal from the cephalic region before those in the glandular area, to the tonsil's throat and oral ulcers.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of withdrawing blood from those is to follow your thigh between your two most forward on top of the knee, elevate the tongue for it, look at the tongue itself, examining both sides of each vein, and the color of either changes into darkness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then withdraw blood from each one; and be aware that you should not finish your hand on withdrawing blood from these ones, because they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your veins that are withdrawn blood from the side are in those where pain is common in all men, and blood withdrawal from them is performed according to two ways, either place it with a pincers or an olive-shaped tool with gradually declining sharpness; or stop with a surgical knife and call this scalpel technique. This is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this scalpel is one that aligns with sectioning and of these are special sides and fine ones according to the width of the veins and according to the tension of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of pincer blood withdrawal:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let it resemble the parts of your body just as you've seen, and aligns to open up the concave veins that are full with visible thick contents, and towards those which contain large pus-filled clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way of performing an abdominal puncture:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This type of puncture is narrower in width and has a finer tip, suitable for the puncture of subtle veins that contain delicate blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Let the youth of the puncture for the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: extract the blood from the patient's malaise that causes pain in their groin and stomach area, as well as from this which affects their feet.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it should be done by the one who performs punctures of this kind; they must protect and support this part, with caution in this area. For if there is an artery near this place, and if you err or adjust during the puncture, that artery will bleed along with any blood flow, so it's necessary not to puncture too deeply when using a sharp tool for these kinds of punctures; first ensure proper technique by following the instructions provided beforehand.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you can't see the basilic vein due to lack of obvious appearance, then make sure not to puncture this area and instead try another method, or look for any nearby veins; or perform a puncture at the end of the arm where the vein is clearly visible; use your puncturing tool with the same care as we have instructed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform an arm puncture, then proceed in front of the elbow bend where you can identify the location of the pulse, and gently press on it with your hand; and guide the arm while pressing down; and guide the arm while pressing down. Locate the vein at the concave section during the puncture using your tool as we have instructed; remember to avoid percussion over a space near the artery area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press with strength on the muscle, there is an inflation in the area you pressed under your hand; then that inflation is due to the artery, and so avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows like water in this puncture area, then it is fine with subtle blood; here you understand that it's part of the artery's blood flow; and here you guide your hand over a long distance; and place your hand as instructed, and if the blood stops flowing, wherever the bleeding has stopped, then you strengthen your arm and leave that spot.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And care for the patient's thigh wound, with caution of their health and don't let it get infected within several days until they recover.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood doesn't stop flowing, when you should not provide medicine under this situation; then you will have pierced the artery, if it's visible to you; where its end is tightened up and bleeding stops; or use a previous type of forceful method, make that action, take one strength and press that spot on the vein at the elbow bend among muscles between the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bleeding stops then it's good; and otherwise, then treat that with this as described in our previous instructions about how to manage the powders that can stop blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of blood from them is difficult in small locations for the wound area and the space available for muscles in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The puncture for the dark vein, the youth of which involves extracting blood from the upper part of the head and towards the back area of the body; thus since it consists of branches from the basilic vein and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And when the one performing the puncture observes this over-caution in the blood extraction area of the patient, where there is a nerve; then if they adjust during the puncture and find that nerve, it will cause them to lose consciousness, making recovery difficult, and if not treated completely, this nerve can affect feelings at certain points. And for those who hide this nerve or make it subtle and do not expose it, you should perform the puncture near your strong position and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you will find the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The youth of puncturing the cephalic vein involves extracting blood from the head and guiding it to alleviate chest pains.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And be careful about this, if you want that punctures use an olive puncture tool or a myrtle puncture tool; which is the saved liquid from all veins, not leaving your artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	So you should remember when performing punctures that you don't merely pierce the head of the lump only, seek out the less prominent area and don't disturb it, unless it is found during the initial percussion which is above that area in several spots.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	So you should strongly restrain yourself in some people when it's not punctured during the first percussion, but don't disturb that lump later.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	This pertains to the quality of puncture and its complications which may occur, for which you should consider how to rectify them.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing to consider is understanding that blood puncture should only be performed for the maintenance of health and with hope for recovery and caution against potential complications; and blood punctures can be made on one of the veins found in the axilla, which are: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and it's appropriate to perform a blood puncture at the beginning of spring, after fasting in early spring and autumn, and during winter close to meals when there are significant signs of replenishment.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And after performing a bloodletting, let them rest until three hours have passed since they began experiencing morning mucus.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Bloodletting should be done when it is convenient and necessary, either in the morning or at night, at any time and under all circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let there be no bloodletting in a child under fourteen years old, nor should a woman who is pregnant undergo bloodletting until the fourth month into the seventh month, and let the elderly not undergo bloodletting if they have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be bled by any means, let them change their bowels before bloodletting with a lion's purge; if they have a retained wound in those areas, so that the veins do not draw the excesses during bloodletting of the bowels which are cleansed and should not burden the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let no patients undergo bloodletting during the night or from illness, nor inebriety, nor pain of labor, nor vomiting, and near a colic attack or nausea, or any cause that dissolves their virtue, whether bodily or spiritual.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in detail the humors before that if the disease is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it's possible for you.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And between in baths if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise through some physical activity so that the disease is attenuated.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And let bloodletting for them take place on their chest in the morning, around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And observe that the chest of each should be watched on every day of all animal mishaps, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as work and excess worries and sex and things like them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And when they wish, let them be given the causes in the use of which there is custom among men for fragrance and odors, and for balms and similar things according to their quantity's possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the bloodletter proceed on a cushion that is larger than the pillow which should be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And extend their arm, and rub that with their hand the bloodletting implement for two or three rounds; and strengthen their muscles with cords and envelop that with two rounds.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And for the correction period, if the constriction is not equal, or if the constriction is due to excess, then prohibit the discharge of the disease; or if it's about alleviation, then prohibit the body from removing the disease.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And during the correction period, let the one who is to be bled rub their hands among them while their veins are swollen, and make them feel this sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And during bloodletting, let the bloodletter apply a little ancient oil on the bloodletting instrument. And then place his hand of the left on that vein for a moment; determine where you want the bloodletting to take place so that the vein begins to leak slightly and the pulsation is stopped like when your heart beats and forces the blood to flow, it's as if you're trying to avoid letting blood from there, because it's full of air. And when the bloodletter stops on that spot, it should be compressed; and the bloodletting instrument does not pierce the vein, but if it does, that one is stretched out.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, let the bloodletting instrument be stopped and diligently consider all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then stop the bloodletting instrument again; however, if a vein is punctured in one round, let it be; otherwise, do this again with another round and leave that spot slightly to yourself, or over them if the spot is not moved.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot is moved or the patient recovers, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen your muscles, lest you pull out an abscess with too much force, nor enter into baths.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And continue the bloodletting if she desires it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if her pulse is slight and there's subtle disease, and you fear it won't remove enough disease, then continue the bloodletting at that place according to rectitude and adjust the amount in the pulse slightly. Do this with haste before the spot is moved; for men of one month, you should take a little more pulse.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if you see that it has already moved, then don't continue over them, for there's no excuse for any cause; pause above them with some part of the olive oil cuticle, which delights the body with disease.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, apply olive oil cuts in every bloodletting when you bleed the veins; do this tyroica alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused on that spot, because the disease becomes subtle when it's large and mixed.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of bloodletting a large abscess is created, which affects several rounds, especially that which hasn't been bled at all until that round or on the pulse, or if it's on the vein and there's a slight move, then you cover it, pause over that spot with an infused sponge in water and salt, one that has been scratched, and strengthen that for one hour when it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And guide them to do this close to the bend of the arm at the height of their pulse or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any darkness or greenness at the spot for a few days, do not notice this; and if you wish, place over that something of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some substance from mint juice or wormwood or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Blisters and pustules occurring indicate abscesses and prominences; you should perform a bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over that, and if you then find softness, apply compression there, that area is evil and bad; and hence be careful to place your hand over that something like what we said, so that a strong flow will come from the arm's artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to that where the inflammation is situated, so that the area is endured, and then attend to that with other treatments until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And guide you to extract from the arm according to each man's quantity based on its virtue, and according to the color over the arm as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the arm is black, then you let it bleed into a basin until it becomes red. Similarly, if it turns thick, then you let it bleed into a thinner substance; and similarly, if it's sharp, then you allow the sharpness to be relieved within that substance.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And guide the one who is full and strong, needing bleeding in a single occasion, that you should greatly enlarge the bloodletting from the vein, and let the bleeding be deep.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite of that. Guide you to bleed him in multiple sessions, and that he be restrained.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing for bloodletting from a vein is a cross-section, not penetration.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of bloodletting saves from the flow of the arm and the cutting of nerves, it is commendable and more safe than bloodletting according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And regarding this kind where sudden fainting occurs, you should perform bloodletting, and guide that you treat him before bloodletting with a little of powder in wine of meadowsweet or simple honeyed water; and draw out the arm's blood in three sessions or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is caused by the heat of the complex, then before bloodletting take an infusion in a mixture of myrrh or in aromatic honey, with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in an aromatic and strongly scented syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if it is followed by fainting, you should perform bloodletting, and if it's caused by the movement of his arm, then guide him to drink water from meat and a strongly scented syrup; use aromaticity in vinegar, and limit his feet towards that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we have mentioned in the division for fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to exercise his arm and dissolve his flow in another session, guide that bloodletting is for evacuation purposes, and the virtue of which is cool, causing it to dissolve little by little, does so according to the amount of its virtue over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May who wants to exercise his arm and draw out his flow in another session, and whose body is strong, then do this close to seven hours or nine from the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May who wants to draw out the body's flow in opposition to its usual direction of flow, guide that it should be exercised on the second day or on the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May this body in which there is already an acute flow that causes fever, guide that you should expel the arm's flow in one session and let it be a large quantity from your arm; and ensure that you have all the conditions for bloodletting within that area until you cause fainting; and place your hand on his wrist to prevent death instead of fainting. This many sessions must be like this when the bloodletter is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not guide when you want to move the arm and evacuate the flow in another session, as soon as you close the openings of the vein and make it difficult for the flow to exit, then press below that forcefully and slightly curve your extended arm; this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it bleed again; or leave this with the sharpness of bloodletting that is coagulated from the flow in the opening of the vein; or place your hand on that with thyme, or sage, and press that with light compression until the flow is out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is infected, then let that alone and do not touch it until the abscess has healed.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the flow again, and it's not an excuse, then prick him in that spot or on another arm at another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein referred to as "arm cord" is bloodletted in the place of the dark or basilic veins, when they are not swollen or hidden, which consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of bloodletting for him is that the patient's hand should dip into hot water until it easily reddens and makes the vein appear distinctly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And further strengthen over that with a ligature around the middle; and further perform bloodletting according to the cross small, not laterally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision broad and do your bloodletting at the point where you take out blood from that above the elbow joint a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of urine is forbidden, then you will move your hand in warm water and let the urine run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from moving your hand in warm water, and similarly during winter, let the body cool in warm water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all others, because it doesn't have any pulsating vein or nerve when you let the patient lie down.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And bloodletting from the wrist artery is related to the maladies of the arm.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of bloodletting for him is that you strengthen your hand or with your own hand, because you place him in warm water, while the vein becomes swollen and is clearly shown through the skin; then do bloodletting across; and if you incise all over there it won't bleed back.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to finish your hand at the bloodletting point because when you remove his fingers from the flesh there are nerves of the digits exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And move your hand in warm water and let the urine flow through it. If you do not move this part in warm water, the urine will clot in the opening of the vein, which is forbidden for urine to pass.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when extracting the blood according to the amount needed, then you press on the vein oil and salt so that it is not compactly congealed; similarly do this for all the branches straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The youth of bloodletting from that on the left wrist is related to the ailments of the leg.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Do something similar for this bloodletting as you did with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the saphena vein in bloodletting is to ailments that are in the lower parts of your body, such as stomach and abdominal issues, and retention of menstruation, and ailments related to impotence and ulcerations of thighs and old chest problems, and they resemble other ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of bloodletting for him is that his body immerses his arm in warm water and does it over that friction where veins appear; he lies on the elbow joint with the arm straightened. The spot of the apparent vein you should place your hand, and from there its branches to the surface of the arm spread out.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then do bloodletting on the larger branch or place his elbow where you should add to him, which is better and with more salt.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you do bloodletting on the surface of the arm, then you avoid the nerves that are located near the surface of the arm, and pause your bloodletting at which point you take out blood in a crosswise manner, as if you were trying to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if possible, do bloodletting.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If urine discharge is forbidden, then move his leg on warm water and let the urine flow through it until it's completely emptied.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting instrument fails in the first attempt, then try again with another bloodletting tool, which is salted; and don't be afraid of his complaints, rather than protecting yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Similarly do it for the saphena vein on the other arm in the same manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And concerning the sciatic vein, as we have said, you should place your hand near his buttocks.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The purpose of bloodletting for him is the thigh pain when it's due to urine stones.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of bloodletting for him is that his body enters into bathing and quickly strengthens his thigh from the back of his ankle under one long, thin bend above four fingers, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you do bloodletting on that according to each method which is possible and according to the crosswise manner, which is better; or you incise it with a cut or make it bleed by squeezing, where his place is salted.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it's in thick and meager men; and if you find this vein, but don't feel it throughout, then do bloodletting on some branch of this, which appears behind the earlobe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And watch out for the nerves, let the amount of urine that you want flow.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then relieve the constriction and pause at the bloodletting point with strength on that spot, which will be somewhat healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding suction and the qualities to use those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Suctions are made with horns, or reeds, or leather.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Suction can be performed in two ways: one method is through incision and blood extraction, and the other is suction without making an incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This type of suction that involves incision occurs in two ways, either with fire or without the use of fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for those suction practices that involve incision and blood extraction, there are fourteen body locations. The first location where suction is applied is the alnocrati, which is the final part of the head; the middle location is in the middle of both parts of the collarbone; suction near the chin leaves the mandible behind, and further from the mouth; suction on two spatulas; suction on alohoster, which is at the tip of the penis; suction on two fire tools, and these are located about one span apart; suction on two cavils; and suction on two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventilation does not remove the pain from small, scattered veins in the flesh, and thus it does not have an effect through those vessels; similarly to puncturing for bloodletting. Nor should ventilation be performed with fire or searing heat on any malady caused by overfullness inside where the body is entirely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessity causes ventilation due to illness or continuous pain, administer that during the entire month and at its end, in the middle of it and at any other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This is the cause of which men are afflicted when their pain becomes multiplied within them due to extraction by ventilation, and they find it to be serious and sweaty; from those it is found that there is overfullness and suffering on their face and in their head, and also in their chest. From these, one finds swelling on their face and forehead and darkness and confusion in their breaths; and from these, the location of their ventilation becomes apparent. From those, their laughter is multiplied; from those, they find a taste for pain in their mouth, or that their tongue is swollen and they spit out pain; and from those, their sleeping becomes multiplied, and from those who snore while sleeping there are pains, ants bites, other ailments, and various causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when times come in any cause of those, especially if it is near the end or middle of the month, then it is commanded that ventilation be performed immediately rather than wait until after the day or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The purpose of neck ventilation is that when it affects gravity in the head and to that which is settled in the breaths; more importantly, consider it as an evacuation of all throughout the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventilation is for the location of bloodletting on the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not prescribed to use that which leads to overfullness or in those who are phlegmatic, as it gives rise to significant harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And thus it is not appropriate to use that with the old ones, and among those who have illnesses on their heads.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	You should order the one who continues above that to make them forgetful; thus it is advisable for you to command the person performing ventilation to place their hand slightly beneath the suction device at the points applied, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Alcohol ventilation is for the location of bloodletting on the dark vein and basilica: thus it causes asthma, constriction in it, and the splitting of its bile duct; and also coughing and overfullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is advisable for the alcohol suction device to be placed slightly, because if it is left in that position, it causes weakness throughout the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	Alhamdulillah ventilation causes head pain and eye disease, as well as migraine, fever, and pain in the cheeks of teeth; it is for bloodletting on the basilica location.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it should be commanded to the person performing ventilation not to press their hand against a scarification, so as not to puncture an artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventilation near the mouth is associated with alcohol in the mouth, and decay of gum tissue, as well as symptoms like those from illnesses found within the mouth, and are located on bloodletting sites on aliheric, which is situated between both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The ventilation that is performed on the two spoons causes heatstroke, which occurs due to overfullness of heat quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two divisions inside the nostrils causes young people to undergo bloodletting from three veins, which are basilica, dark, and head veins. This draws out pain from all those small veins that exist in the flesh, as well as from the small veins within larger veins where the flow reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the one performing ventilation not to proceed in scarification, where the place is stripped of flesh, and leave them with their nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And there is one kind of suction on which hemorrhoids on the anus and ulcers are caused from those left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it should be commanded to the person performing suction that there should be a large suction, and one made of copper where the place requires strong drying; with the person experiencing the subtle pulling from the suction devices being treated with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The suction of the small joints through obvious diminution draws out pain from throughout the body and relieves ancient discomforts in the kidneys and uterus, as well as the bladder; they also induce menstruation and cause coughing and other symptoms. These are located at the bloodletting points for two syphylis sites, hanging amputation, and two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken all throughout the body and cause dizziness to occur in men during movement.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And when it comes to hanging amputation ventilation, young people prefer it as much as the ventilation of two joints.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the suction devices is that you pause the suction at first view and continue with quick heat, and do not prolong the position of the suction devices, but rather pause them slightly, and reapply them gradually, ensuring that the fluids arrive at the place evenly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the suffering becomes apparent.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you perform scarification and continue with heat gradually, always considering the disposition of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that person who has thin, fragile skin is injured, it's advised to only do so once and not press too hard, in order to prevent the wound from becoming inflamed.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the scraper to increase the scraping and do it gently, always suctioning easily.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickening in the wound, then it's recommended to perform two scrapings: in the first, you open the path for lymph drainage and for bodily fluids.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, focus on examining the acquired body fluid from the removal of the thick wound material.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is filled with mucus, then it's necessary to perform a third scraping for it to reach the end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gradually, when we want to extract some mucus little by little or even just a small amount, enough for one scraping is sufficient.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to remove mucus, we scrape with a thick scraping; and if we know that the mucus is thick, then it's necessary to perform a wave-like scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scraping until it reaches the depth of the wound only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And for those whose wounds are thick, hard, dark, and whose veins are tight, it's recommended that the suction cup locations be treated gently, more widely, forcefully; during summer, such as with aloes oil or violet oil, or lemon oil, or camomile oil, or mustard oil; and during winter, similarly to onion oil, or linden oil, or chamomile oil, or saffron oil, and similar products.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, rough, then the oil should be saffron, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or thyme oil, and similar products.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the scraper is made of thin flesh, then it's advised not to use oil, and that near the suction areas for the suction cup, they should be washed with water or saffron-infused water, or water from lemons, or water from bitter oranges, and similar products next to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for that which has mucus in the wound, wash their suction cups with vinegar or water mixed with myrtle and sumac, and similar products next to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose excesses are thick, wash their suction cups with vinegar old, or with water of sanguinaria, which is marjoram, or from decoction of thyme, or chamomile, and similar products next to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it's recommended that the suction be kept in front of bathing; you should also have it administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and make sure to sleep near the suction.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary is that the blood-sucking tool be regulated before the application of suction.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And when considering the meal: if the suction tool or the one who performs bloodletting is irritable and has a hot temperament over acute wounds and inflammation, then it's advised that they take cooling remedies, such as vinegar lettuce and milk, and spinach, and apple cider vinegar, and julep, and similar products.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And let their meals include such as poultry, cooked rabbit, and seasoned vegetables, and similar products.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose complexion is rough, it's recommended that they drink essences of almond oil or essence of apple cider vinegar mixed with sumac, and vinegar with a mild odor between old and new; and it should be advised to them to consume small quantities of water and food, and have pauses in their meals consisting of poultry, rabbit, fish, little hares, and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it's recommended that the amount of water consumed on the day of suction and bloodletting should be greater than food intake.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it's recommended to give in drinking before some hours for people with tyroliac alfaarac or medicines of muscle, such as mustard, or garlic near suction or near bloodletting or nearby, so that the main members are comforted and that inflammation is reduced; do not recommend taking that hot remedy.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Use suction cups that are the result of scraping on the heel, over the knee and gout, on the navel, under the testicles, and on the waistband, as these limbs do not suffer from scraping internally.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	Do not apply suction to those areas but for the elimination of mucus in the limbs, such as using a suction cup on the breast during mastopathy due to the flow of mucus in the breast; and use that remedy so that the thick, sticky wind is dissipated from the body parts, such as applying it to the abdomen and navel area; where that invigorates the limb, cools the body, and dispels the pain associated with wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it's applied to the armpits during their eruption or boil, through the force of suction, it helps to relieve sweating and removes the boil from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when it's applied on the thighs and hips to expel wind in those confined areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these suction cups are administered with just juice alone, whereas some are given with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they're administered full of red water in chest pains affecting the hips.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that's why the suction cup is filled with a large amount of pus, so it's just water or water in which herbs suitable for that are steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Shape of the suction performed at the fire: make the size of the opening two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of smoke be the length of a palm; and it should be in the left side of him, in the place that is inside the circuit, the length of his, let the intake be small according to the quantity that enters him with one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The procedure for an egg or citrus wound, with large margins, lion-like and smooth cuts, all must be done in such a way that doesn't lead the member to its usual position on him.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it is at the top of the crosswise line of the egg or iron, where the candle is placed under the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And now this large suction is like the one we described previously; and the small fluid of that, according to the patient's condition and state of health who uses that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and weak are different from those for adults and large areas.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction cup on a member is to spread the iron over fire wood facing a small candle wax, and place that above the middle of the cross line at the middle location of the suction, so that the fire be lit around that area to prevent burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed on the patient's member, and it is about the tip that we have said, when we have the suction cups and do not need the tip and the steam burns that part of the tip, then the suction will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And according to its usual manner, heat the iron, and repeat that if needed with another.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	For the suction that is administered in pleurisy, with water, in which there is no cross line or tip, and it is not administered except when filled with water, and it is placed only on the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this suction cup; the larger it is, the better it is, for it can receive large quantities of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Title 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissugas are not administered in the joints of muscles, but only on those parts where it's impossible to place suction cups due to their small size, like the eye, gums and similar areas; or on flesh-free members, like the nose and areas resembling it.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found as blood-sucking cups that are in the boiled water's foam.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be left soaking in boiled water for the day and night, without causing any disturbance in their stomachs; and have them evacuated with bloodletting and suction cups; and gently rub the patient's member until they turn red; and then place it on them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled, and if there is a case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it's possible to use the area with suction cups, it's better in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with fresh water and apply moistened mud; and rinse it and press it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the patient's body is prolonged to the site of the blood-sucking cups, and it is this residualness, then you immerse a cloth in cool water, and place that above so as to absorb the residue.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the illness is multiplied, then apply on it vitriol trisatted or similar substances for coagulation causes, until the blood is congealed; or they are placed on the area the ashes of toasted beans, and left so that the beans adhere to the area, and when the blood is congealed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if needed, repeat the use of blood-sucking cups, whenever it's possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood-sucking cups are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with recent blood or leave a needle in those areas where it causes blood to flow; and they should be placed, so that when you feel some blood, they immediately adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to come down, apply a little of trisatted aloes or salt, or ashes on those and cauterize immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment for the next part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter discusses necessary tools in the art of medicine; and it's about restoring fractures and accidental displacements in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, know that many doctors and laypeople, as well as those who will not study the works of the ancients nor read even a single letter from them, consider this chapter to be trivial.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists on earth is private; I won't forget that even in times when we had access to all their works; and I haven't included what I've learned, but only after spending time reading the works of the ancients and studying their understanding, extracting the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct yourself to experimentation and study throughout your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter all of my science and what was passed through experimentation; therefore, condense this to you others and release it from the occupation of elongation; and shorten this at the end of shortening; then demonstrate this at the end of declaration; and formulate this into various forms of storms that are administered there, as done through declaration, similarly as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collections from the fractures of bones, from which it is necessary to have a prelude before we begin recalling the parts of fractures and various things for each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, when speaking about the introduction of this chapter, let us state the summaries of what is said; and for each capital, when the understanding of those starts with the beginning, it is where the artisans are to test their truth. It is you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art as well as others from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Therefore, when an accident occurs with a fracture or dislocation or twist or compression, then you should start at the beginning with bloodletting or apply that (a cure), or any other time, if there is no prohibition from any cause, such as vertigo, or if it happens to someone who is weak, or old in age, or during violent heat, or during violent fever.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then be content with food made of herbs such as rue and meat of rabbits and crabs; and prohibit heavy meats and fill instead with foods and any kind of food that fills the veins of the hand, within which you can ensure against a boil. And if you do not fear leakage of matter in the limb, then so it is.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their primary state wherein they usually are.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, let the patient be nourished with nutritious foods of solid and dense kind, where their viscosity is prominent, such as bread cooked in water, eggs, soups, meats, belly parts of cows, oysters, fresh fish, thick and similar things to those, and under this regime coagulation of pus from the fracture happens slightly and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones grow in those who are in the early youth and in those who are old, it is not possible for them to continue growing according to their nature through the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they grow and are continuous according to their nature all the time through the drying out of those limbs; they continue growing and solidifying those that come from them in the end of childhood, such as the bones of young infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and renews about the broken bones of every part with any cause similar to caking in which a bulk sticks and strengthens inside that where it hardens and becomes solid over time. Inside where is the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, where for no cause you prohibit him from his works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to abstain from foods of the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fractures according to the variety of limbs.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are various according to the diversity of the limbs, where a fracture of the bone of the chest is different from that of the skull's bone; and a fracture of the foot's bone is different from that of the leg's bone; and similarly, all other limbs are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I conclude with a recollection of every species of fracture, detailed in its chapter distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures within oneself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of bone fracture within oneself are varied; one is made in an arched manner another that occurs in the joints. And some are made according to the length of the bone: and these are fractures related to the neck, joints, and not-joints, such as when it's prepared for writing on paper, and it's a fracture through grinding and disruption in the head, and it's a small crack fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every species, there is an appropriate or difficulty in restoration according to that which will come from the recollection of it distinct in its locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this reason, bone fracture is known: it has a curvature of the affected area, and the sensation of that prominence or attachment to one's hand when you press on it.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is no obvious curvature in the area and it does not feel like you are pressing the bone with your touch when you press on the bone with force, then if the patient does not find great pain here, then there is no fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be curvature or a small crack, let it be known that you can feel it with your hand and the compression of all. Have patience about it with regard to the medicines for which recall comes at this moment what suits its place; and straighten it through subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the place is arched and does not split into two or another that does not happen in its joint, as it has been expanded throughout all parts of its comparison, then let you start from your time to correct it whenever there comes a boil with it.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if there comes a boil with it, let you smooth that for a few days until the boil ceases; and then equalize that according to any method you can of lightness and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and alignment of it are less severe than in the bone where it occurs naturally.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what will come from recalling it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the bone there are joints, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it's the hand or the foot; or with your own hand if the limb is small; or with two strings or with one string and a hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And make sure your position allows you to place the limbs in their natural location equal according to their natural shape, while the parts are stretched out from the body's joints; then perform it so that you make those additions return to their original location, and according to any method you can apply in their positions.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care that your strength does not cause damage to the patient during your operation or injury, and perform it according to your ability that you apply one bone to another in their best forms as their companions.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And when in that moment usefully touch with your hand this one, and if you see any cause different here, correct this one and adjust this according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, even as some old doctors allow certain ulcers to form pus under their operations, or cause a contraction in the limbs like we have seen through their operations on their swollen ulcers.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect closely, ensure equilibrium and regular operation and strictness of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient on this and make them refrain from damaging it during their vigil nights and sleep time, and observe its evolution and agitation, understand his weakness, and note all his movements through the full extent of your virtue; wait to see if the position of the limb is at a place where the pain is assured, which is what causes discomfort when felt in the disposition of the member's position causing injury or damage; then ensure you change that to another position with respect to that where no pain is felt; and take care that this position of him towards it should be straight and equal, so that when restored, the limb does not incur distortion.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the tightness of the immobilized limb is this one that I recommend; so you know that broken limbs vary in their size and in their magnitude and in the form of those ones.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and so-called easy ones resembling those, ensure that the wrapping is made of a soft fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large like the thigh or belly, ensure that in those there is a bandage tight and hard, so that by connecting the hardness of the bandage with the large and strong limb from all sides to an equal tightness, thus avoiding any mark on it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin to proceed, your operation of evacuation, place it conveniently with respect to this, over the spot of that fracture with three bandages or four according to which limb requires it; and strengthen your hand a little on the seam.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And proceed to take it towards that upper part of the spot of the fracture, and strengthen moderately so as not to force your tightness in which you have tightened the spot of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And proceed to lengthen the bandage at the spot of the fracture slightly, and gradually soften the tightness little by little, until you take hold of the spot for a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And proceed to take another bandage and wrap that other swollen area over the immobilized spot with a bandage, and proceed to bring those bandages towards that upper part of the fracture; and your operation is in the tightness of the bandage and in softening it according to what we said about the first bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And proceed to pause between the bandages of the foot or cloth in which the curvature of the fracture is equalized, if there is curvature in it; and otherwise, do not pause for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And proceed to pause on the other bandage, and proceed to adjust over these star-shaped bandages made just now, if there is no swelling or pus under the spot, and then pause where there was that pus or swelling; and leave it for a few days; and then you strengthen with it those stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stars at the highest part of cane be red, and formed wisely; or made from wood sticks; or from palm leaves; and make each star's width according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	Therefore ensure that the star placed over that fracture is somewhat larger and slightly harder than the other stars, and adjust the length of the star according to its measurement in magnitude and size when compared to the limb; then proceed to strengthen with it on another bandage after your first tightness; then lie down properly according to what we have discussed about tightness, so that your tightness is most at the location of the fracture, and as you extend further from the fracture, more relaxation should occur.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are of medium thickness and are numerous; if the threads are thick, as I have seen through the operation of some times placing those cords' threads which were twisted, it is a great mistake when making tightness equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are not convenient because you won't be able to achieve the tightness that you desire with them, and ensure that there is only one finger's width between stars and stars.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is laid out so that their extremities are placed near the tightness at those spots, then pause and place them under the fur of a lion or woven linen to prevent any injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures occur due to injuries, and cause disruption in the sequence; I will come back to recall this situation specifically at the Capitol according to uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for all broken member it is not streched to the stars on the first day; which cause is that when the member, if it's big, cannot rest on your stars until approximately three or four or more days, according to your confidence in the occurrence of an abscess cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of splints on which the Ancients worked, which are placed over fractures, dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of splinting like a short restoration of fracture, suitable for complex cracks and primarily for women and children, which is based on the powder from grinding meal, it is the starch part that comes out of the flour when you move the dough in the grinding mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And as such use it, instead sift that with egg white, and pause the thick or delicate process; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for treating fractures and dislocations: take a mixture of myrrh, dogbane, acacia, cinnamon, and saffron, which is prepared with one thousand grains each, totaling ten drachms; add five drachms of frankincense and twenty drachms of aloes; all these should be ground finely and mixed with almond water or egg white if the patient's condition allows. And then use this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and enhances their strength in men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for preparing plaster which helps with fractures and twists: take one drachm of saffron, and three-quarters of a drachm each of frankincense and white myrrh; add twenty drachms of honey and mix well.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All together grind in a mortar with the twist stone, sift them, and mix them with water or with egg white and then administer it.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of splinting for joints and bones separated from their places, and relief the pain in those and cracks and fractures: take thread yarn and immerse it in strong vinegar and oil, then place it over the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster doesn't just serve for restoration, but also expels abscesses and truly relieves pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and dried poppy stalks; mix all together to make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A short plaster method for administering the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining abscesses: use a mixture made from white powdery substances, chamomile flowers, violet petals, cornmeal flour, all in equal parts. Grind them all and mix with vinegar, if the body is not injured.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it has been injured, then use that in wet clove water or in water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of dressing pus to resolve faster than this first one, when an abscess occurs you need the restoration of the limb: use a mixture made from powders of white lead, charcoal, poppy seeds, honeybush, basil, and violet flowers; all in equal parts. Grind them all and mix with water from mustard or double strength water or vinegar, whichever suits the quality of the body and matches its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Mix Ypocras with olive oil instead of dissolving it in its liquid form when placed over the broken limb for restoring it, not a candle made from wax and oil but rather another cause; and advise that you choose between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	It has been observed that when placed over the broken limb it helps with restoration of the limb, and the causes in which dryness from quality is present are as such like myrrh, ashes and similar to those causes we have listed.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A plaster method that helps with injury and pain: use powdered ashes, hair from shaved heads or walnut skin, mixed equally with myrrh and salt; grind them, sift them, mix them together, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Determine the quantity based on what is observed when you check if there's any swelling or inflammation, considering whether it is due to pain or pressure or if the bone is broken but not out of place, then don't move your body for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you experience severe pain or pressure, inflammation at the spot, then restrain yourself or move that area immediately, and apply your plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth from him and wet sponge of the sea lion. Immersing that in boiling water, use it to wash the affected area until the pain ceases and the discomfort subsides; then lay the member to rest for an hour; also place over it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil, covering it throughout the night till you are sure there is no pus under the scab, and that the swelling of the limb has reduced, and the pain has been alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully stretch that constriction and apply the plaster without straining your initial constriction, and do this within an area where it will heal.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you notice that the pus and the heat and the pain and the swelling and all accidents have already healed completely, and if you need plaster and stretching, then do this by repeating the process from the beginning with equal intervals.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if nothing happens to the limb for any reason as we have said, then do not change it but instead wait about three days or four or five. And some of this is left for twenty days according to how it appears with the loosening of the limb, as we have said, during which the fracture sticks together, and it comes to rest on that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust more in the stretching than in your first stretching altogether, and adjust according to the thickening of the patient's thigh meat, as the recollection of them proceeds.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Maybe if you notice that the fracture site has dried out and is more stretched than compressed, then you know that nourishment cannot reach there; therefore, cover it with boiling water throughout the day; do this for all three days; relieve the stretching a little, and through this operation supply nutrition to the limb, and it gets slightly healed.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	This is how the restorers of limb fractures do it in another stage when they are not restored at the beginning, according to whether it's compressed or restored according to its curvature, which is an error according to their operation, and great fear. If this were to be straightened out as enlarged by the ancients in their free works and was treated with this treatment.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	According to the second: When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are blows, and their appearances are various, and their causes differ. Some fractures occur due to impact by space, where the impact stops all bones within the skull, which leaves the bones alone, as if it were in the shaft, and thus this type is called scapular; or space impacts a part of the bone, impacting the meat but not passing the impact into the backside of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute lifting.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and from the friction or compression; and the cause for it is impact on wood or hammering on stone, and in this manner they resemble.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the sinus cavity which leaves the bones alone; or it's within the bone itself. The plague of these two types of fractures can be either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this is the fracture that is widened in the bone, with small subtlety of the hairline, and thus this type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is the fracture that occurs due to hammering or impact with stone, resembling it, causing one of the bone layers to enter into its divisions within. This happens in the concave area, similar to what happens when tools are impacted on and their entry points into the divisions happen within.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly this happens in wet bones, such as those of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of fracture spots, they are like stars that are separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will revisit with the recollection of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these types of fracture through detection on them and investigation of their symptoms and examination of the rotten flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known for this that it's revealed on the bone surface and cleaned off; it has a boundary around it when the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	And in the treatment of fracture, consider at the beginning the patient's symptoms, and then if you notice signs that indicate clear meaning for fever, as such as vomiting from cholera, expansion, loss of understanding, bleeding from sores, fainting, acute fever, smell disturbance and heat of those, and resembling their symptoms in major conditions, it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you notice unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery; then you start treating the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This cause is that if you come across the plague in the beginning as it's contracted and this happens during winter days, then you study in the bone remnant before day fourteen according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it's during the days of summer, then you wait until the seventh day when what remains of the bone is rotten from the sinus cavity and the symptoms that we have recounted occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already spread to the sinus cavity and covers the brain, with small divisions that are compressed and forced, then you should cut into the affected part and massage it gently, according to what I will advise you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you would cut off the head of the patient's wound, and expose on it the bone according to custom and manner as far as possible according to the shape of the wound, and make sure not to press down heavily on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you happen to need detection of the bone, pus from an infection or abscess, then you press against it with this tool that covers it, and you would fill the place with infused cloth in vinegar and oil rubbed in, and let the wound rest within which should relieve the abscess; and be sure of blood flow; and proceed to circle around the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that is according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you incise the bone with a straight incision tool, and this is its form: And then administer another incision tool, slightly smaller than that one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more of the wider incision tool than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And choose the number of various incision tools that you need, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others, they should be at the tip of their extremities, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them for ease in striking the incision tools that it does not crush and damage that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must puncture in the vicinity of its front before administering the incision tools on the trails; which are named as non-deep trails.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named otherwise than those that do not reach the end of the bone in this way, for so it is close to them; whereby at the trail its round extremity or edge meets with the one where you leave its sharp tip resembling an edge or a small circle, which must be prevented from being submerged and going below the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient for you to use many of these trails each one that suits the thickness of any bone, within which must be present in all parts of the head, where its end should be sharp; the quantity in length and width should be according to the quantity of thickness of this part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of trails: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the trail on the bone and move it with your thumbs until you know that the bone has penetrated; then rearrange the trail to another location, and place whatever quantity corresponds to the thickness of the ray or around this.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you should incise with the incision tool between each piece of bone, and make it as subtle as you can at its end in levity, as we have said, while you eliminate the bone or with your hand, or for some other reason using tools you will have equipped for this, such as tongs and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure that you take all precautions so that the incision tool does not touch any part of the scapula.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have drilled the bone and if it is separate from the scapula if it continues with it, take out that piece, make sure to measure and compare it with the roughness of what is in this bone with another tool similar to an incision tool, however be careful that it is more precise and subtler than the other incision tools.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you find any part of the pettid and hard bones, then take that with ease using these tools; proceed to treat this wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is more gentle and far from pain, as Guillaumus taught and the method was through great skill; this is its speech: it is necessary for you in the beginning that you start to uncover the part of the bone of the body where the breakage is most violent and most evident. Once you have uncovered that part and paused at its extremity with a gentle yet swift incision tool, here's how it works:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And this is why the conical part is hard and does not cut any cause, while the sharp part is in two lengths ahead of it in width, as we see; that the conical part must be fitted against the scapula to the flat edge that sharply meets with the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike the incision tool on one part with a small nail so that you can cut all the bone easily as it has turned, and you should be sure of the compass that will not hit in the accident that you fear in any manner, and if the surgeon was the root of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if you find any cause attached to the bone of the compass in some parts of the bone, cut that one with it from the conical edge of the incision tool, and remove that one easily, which is removed from its pain and distress.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the compass, and whatever is separated or remains of the bone is its surface, and it is rough and hard in this area, then you must measure that roughness and remove those hard parts with fine razors which you have prepared with the number of various quantities so that it's possible for you to use them in every place according to their most suitable qualities and straight away from those following where your operation has left this broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And correctly follow your own reason when you should grind the bones at the beginning of their grinding process, and then use almost entirely the fine liquid from it, and do not stop performing this until you reach the point of administering the fat and the fine liquid from all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any other small capillary fractures or subtle fractures, you should administer treatment according to how you would proceed with the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it's because these are not softened on all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And stand on what we have written, showing large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pineal gland is obstructed when you remove the bone, then make sure to take lint according to the amount of the wound, and immerse that in rubbed oil, and place that over the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in water and rubbed oil, and place that over the first cloth; and do so lightly on that until you can without harming the skin. And apply a layer of fat over that, and don't press that more than what the wound has enough of alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let that remain with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the pus being evacuated; then remove that and start administering medicines against excessive drying, such as linseed cakes and cornmeal, and powders of essences and aristolochia, and those like them.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should use powdered medicines from these substances that are ground over the wound, such as dry ones; universally, administer to it all medicine of its nature which avoids contact and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And follow your skill to ensure that the wound in your treatment is clean; do not let it be in the oiliness of ointments or any other substance; nor let you add toxicity to it. For when placed on the skin of the brain, corrupt that and let that happen, and spread this evil malice towards the patient nearby.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And proceed to the skin of the head, as if it were changed by your bones and much more when treatment is delayed for him; and you'll see a blackness on the surface. And therefore consider now if accidents happen to the patient that we've said, know that they are toxicities totally.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you don't see blackness but rather from the medicine placed above it, and this blackness is due to the virtue of that medicine causing this blackness, then make sure to take honey in parts and rubbed oil parts for it. And let these lines be on a cloth, and then place that over the head; and treat it with the spices of treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Third section.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On restoring the nose when it's broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken from the nose itself but rather in two parts at its upper joints, or one of those sometimes dislocated, because there are two bones in it, and the part you leave is cartilaginous, not broken, and does not hurt it except for swelling, deformity, and obstruction.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the nasal cavity and adjust that fracture internally with your thumb inside and outside, until the nose returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for yourself with ease, and watch that you don't harm the patient during it.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper joint part of the nose and your finger doesn't reach there, then make sure to adjust it at the end of the ray where there's a little thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make like this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And attend to the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, in this case, after seven or ten days you should resume pus evacuation.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of cloth in the end of the nose with one band if the fracture is in one part, or two candles if the fracture is in two parts; and put it inside the candle with as much quantity that fills up the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And among the ancient restorers, they say that the candles should be wrapped in bandage and be changed every day, but I don't see this method; make sure that the cloth is covered with egg white mixed with essence powder; then leave it until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes firm.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes dislocations are found in the nose instead of candles, in case of much pus that's wrapped with a lion's hide cloth; and it seems that you already have the nasal fracture severe and that the patient can't breathe.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method isn't necessary for you; if you want to, do this way, and if you prefer, use candles.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another pus evacuation occurs, plaster the nose with cerat or with fat ointment mixed in water and rubbed oil, or with diacetyl.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if you don't have pus evacuation, then make sure to plaster it outside with cornmeal and essence powder mixed with egg white; then place it on top of the stopper made from lion's skin; and never restrict your nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	And if the bones of the nose are broken in a small fracture or comminuted, then make sure to open over those, and extract them with instruments that suit for those; then cover the cut, treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and plaster with what's suitable.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if it happens that there is an internal plague in the nose, then cure that with garlic and administer lead pipes inside until it becomes completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw of the patient is broken and the fracture is not infected, observe now if the fracture is only external, and is not broken into two parts but is bent inward from the sides; then its knowledge [i.e., severity or location of the injury] is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, introduce your left index finger in the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce that same index finger of the right hand. And push outwards inside the fractured part, facilitating its return to its original position from both sides outside of the jaw opening; do this equally with the other hand towards the opening of the jaw from both sides.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to rightness while it is possible for their equilibrium.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is an impact of teeth causing disruption, then strengthen those that you expect to break in the course of gold or silver or copper; and place your hand on the broken jaw with a clothe, and place another cloth under him/her, and place a large star-shaped cloth properly made, or one piece equal in length to the jaw; then lie it up according to how you are accustomed to do it and that suits the situation, while ensuring it doesn't get destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and have them abstain from drinking sweet foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has been altered in some manner, then do this and untie it on the third day; and then correct what is already altered from your patient and plaster that with powder of moli, with almond butter, or with millet flour, provided you have left the clothe on your patient, and place a layer of the plastered cloth over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when this plaster is adjusted on you and the position of the mouth is not altered, leave it alone, do not untie it until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for the times of this fracture being healed is three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another pus lump occurs due to a boil, then administer what we have said about times of healing for your body while it heals, and renew that boil.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or stuck, then you should distinguish those stuck with what suits for their removal in the extraction of those from the inflammation.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds of the infection are healed, then you should enlarge them with a bloodletting instrument according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finished removing those stuck pieces, and if no pus is left from them, then when the wound of the infection is large; but if not, cover that with one of the plasters that suit it, until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the sternum when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The times of healing are when the sternum is broken in front of the muscle part, and that fracture occurs in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Or it's broken, or separated, or separates into two parts without causing stickiness; and its restoration is slight in him/her; or thus if stickiness occurs in him/her, then the restoration of him/her is difficult; or thus if the fracture is infected.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And in that case, when the fracture is infected, you should have two ministers present, so that one has the assistant and follows the broken sternum, and the other extends the neck over that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then enclose the fracture with your fingers until its form is made as he/she sees fit, and it should not be in his/her depression or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then take the patient's expectation cloth or wool, and make it as large as he/she sees fit; extend and elevate the sternum while holding the lump with your hand until you equalize the fracture according to what you see.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the sternum outward to its sides, because it's pushed up towards the throat, then you should have the patient lie on their back, and place a hand halfway in size over the muscle of your body.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister places their hand over the muscle of your body outward until the bone of the sternum is elevated as it's pushed up towards the throat in its position, and then you correct the fracture and enclose that with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel stickiness from the sternum and they are swollen, then you should cut over that and remove those stuck pieces with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should use incision on him/her with one of the incisors that you have accustomed to this, as you had placed the sternum over the inflammation that serves the throat; and this is the shape of that tool:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is like the shovel of which this is the cavity; and its width according to how much you need from him, according to the size of the bone or its weakness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of him be according to what is possible for the operation; may there be two ends like times, and one end broad and the other stretched.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the rupture of the wound that you have incised when you extract the spongy part of the bone is large, and you are sure about a boil cautery, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suturing.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the rupture is small, or you fear a boil cautery, then use the wound with bandages and powders according to the quantity of the cut in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if a boil cautery occurs, then soak a cloth in water and rose oil and vinegar, and place it there.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the narrowing of the bone when it is sutured and its section be that you pause in applying a plaster made of mill flour mixed with egg white, and place it over his forehead. And if he needs it, then take another piece of cloth soaked with water and rose oil and vinegar, and place it there as well. If you can't find that, and want to use another method, then take a table spoon gently, which should have the length of about your palm or slightly more; and adjust this over the wound, applying powders on both sides. And take a thin tablecloth with width equal to three fingers in length as well; wrap this around the powder, placing it carefully on the fractured area; then apply another layer of powder here too, spreading evenly until it covers the entire part. When you see that the fracture's narrowing descends continuously and isn't hidden by your action.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And in conclusion, make sure the tablecloth does not cover the broken bone; and continuously check if you see the patient every day, for when the swelling subsides or the tablecloth is no longer needed, then adjust this again and strengthen the connection.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And adjust the patient's sleep on his neck, place his pillow so that it is higher than his chin every night with just a small cushion; thus when this is elevated, support your aid under his armpit, and therefore the fracture of the sternum should be raised to an elevation in the muscle; or have his arm resting at his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not displace the wound if it doesn't swell suddenly or form a boil within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And adjust the plaster if you see his face in this manner, and correct the narrowing, restore it and smooth until the restoration is completed and the fracture of the sternum has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some patients are operated on in months of that period.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Regarding the restoration of the shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is broken at his left side and not broken within him but rather on the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when his place is broken - and it's broken in the middle of him - not known except through touch, then according to how the fracture shape forces you, prepare for him and reduce that according to the natural figure throughout every manner of technique that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And adjust over that place, mill flour mixed with egg white and a bandage; and adjust on him multiple layers of cloth powder; then apply on his table a thin tabletop piece according to the entire quantity or even less than that of the spatula.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May if leaving the table is concave in one of the places of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with a bandage, and later adjust the table according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it from above with a long spoon to allow for proper descent and keep the table within not being swollen in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the wound every day; whenever it becomes softened, have another session and strengthen him, and level the table if it swells in its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient over his left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The table is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you should know safely that if it comes from the bones where it started, it will not be feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you're dealing with the bone in the place and put down his chain, then you'll divide over him, hold it, and do as we have said about the fracture of the sternum for the presence of a boil caut here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Regarding the restoration of the leg fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The leg in some occasions is broken in the middle of him and that is where the spatula should be; but his ends should not be crushed or reduced.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And regarding the accidents of him when broken in his middle it declines towards the parts inside and occurs to him great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, weakness, faintness, and vomiting; and this is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and cannot be hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of him is that he should be placed with his patient on his back and place a cushion between his shoulders; then press on his muscles, adjust his ribs according to two sides, refine in your operation and in the balancing according to every manner possible that suits you within that so as to return the figure of the bone whenever he sees.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place on them a plaster and bandage, and place something soft underneath until you have laid down a subtle table of sage or of ashes, as well as one similar in shape to yours in levity; because you wrap that inside cloth. And delicately cover that over the broken bone so it doesn't heal improperly; and then add padding according to roundness on your back for several times, and strengthen that with a tight bandage; and constantly consider the padding at all times, and when it has softened, strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes you to cause decay or cutting, or pain, or abscess that happens in the area, then remove and untie that, and discard the plaster and correct whatever happens according to this manner of treatment for him; and then return the plaster, if you see something with the hand; and adjust the bandage so it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On restoring the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur in small injuries but only when they pierce through to the other side; and at the extremities of them on their partition in front, it does not happen with those contractions otherwise because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge about it is not hidden from the feeling; you must inquire of the person for these statements.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you align the fracture according to the possible method with the bones as they are covered, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone inside, if you need that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining into the parts inside, then it causes pain and puncture in the patient, like the puncture that happens when someone has burst, because through that the lung is wounded; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of acidic contents; and this is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Greeks are ingenious with these motions inside.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And about them they say: breathe to hold food from the patient that produces inflammation and wind, so that the belly is inflated and stretched outwards, and the fracture is pushed towards the parts outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Let us avoid causing that through whatever way it may not be the cause of minor generation of an abscess to form, if it doesn't happen; and if it already happens, then help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say about some that it is held up against the suction and closely that one sweats with strength; and this resembles reasoning, but however, it's feared that the suction carries off the excesses due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say about some: breathe so that the area is covered with wool that is already submerged in oil caut, and dust is placed between the ribs until it fills up, making sure that the padding aligns as you wrap that according to roundness; and then let the patient be treated by colic from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the constriction causes intense pain in the patient who cannot bear it, and the lung is wounded by tooth puncture, we fear for the patient; then breathe so that you cut on the spot, expose from the broken rib, and then place the tool over which the technique follows, which I will describe next, and insert the bones with ease, and remove that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound if it's large with stitches, and treat that with plaster until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess happens inside, then you cut and place dust in rubbed oil on the spot, and let the patient be treated with this method that addresses the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be folded over the side where he sleeps, until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On restoring a fracture of the vertebral column and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some observations about fractures in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their ligaments, and likewise for the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens with someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider that if their hands are already softened, numb, dead, cannot be made stronger nor extended, nor pricked by a needle without feeling pain in them, then you know it is not healing, and in similar conditions it's fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they're sick and you feel this constriction in your hands and puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover from treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similarities with this for the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will heal or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you find that they are already softened, this happens in their hands like it does with the hands. And when you lie on their back, they have wind and loss of appetite according to their will, and several times you fold them on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and hence do not strive for their treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	And if nothing of this happens, the cause is better and more minor.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for this is that you perform on the desensitization of the abscess to oil rubbed on the vertebra protrusion, or with hazel leaves; place some areas over this each day until the abscess is numbed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the bandages, comforting and relieving, on it with strength; and command the patient to take rest and have calmness, not to sleep in the spot where he finds pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that you have to remove the bone of the tibia or any cause that has already separated from them, then let the exit occur over the seam and place that bone; then adjust both edges of the wound, with stitches if they are large; and then treat that with some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If it is broken in the heel of the tibia bone and it's the tip of the penis, then let you insert the tip of your left hand into the buttock, and align that broken bone with your other hand as possible according to the second equation; and then place over him the bandage and sandal if you need those, and then strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel bones broken in him, then place that one on it, and hold that, and treat the wound with the treatment that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capital X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of the thigh.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the thighs are broken, and if they break, then their fracture is merely communication in the extremities of those, being inscribed along its length and declining towards the inner parts; it happens to the patient pain at that location and puncture, and the body becomes numb when there is a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And for his restoration, you would place your hand over it within which the fracture that is the shape of him lies.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of him, then you would align that according to what can be aligned by equation within which it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long or already declines towards the inner parts, then you must make the patient lie on his stomach so that you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have aligned that, place over him the bandage, and then place over that sandal or seam, and strengthen with compression on which do not fear the puncturing of the fracture nor moving of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity with that which fills it within which that accepts compression according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his two or neglect his side's.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if it happens that an abscess appears, then you stop the extension of him and his restoration until that abscess is treated, and place over him what sedates that according to which was preceded; and then return to the restoration of him and strengthen that as needed.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the tibia bone or are broken, then you would treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Capital XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of the助手 (literally translates to "assistant" or "helper", might be a specific part of the body or medical tool; context is needed for an accurate translation).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade, in the area of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of him is in one of two ways, of which you would take half plate of wood with medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if they are located at both extremities, two ligaments exist, and then he should be suspended from the elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on his back; and then extend his broken arm over the stick until it reaches to the tip of his body in its middle position, where the curvature of the stick is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend over it something heavy or the surgeon extends that at the inner parts; and then let the doctor examine the fracture on his hands, until the fracture returns as needed.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is that the patient should be supine on his back and have his arm extended over his chest; then command two servants that one of them hold what is underneath the fracture on his hands, and the other holds the elbow's region; each of them should extend at their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you wish for the extension to be more forceful, then strengthen on the fracture and on that with another ligament, and each of the two servants should extend at both their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the muscle's extremity, then let there be half of the ligament placed on the tip and the other part of the fracture should go towards the shoulder.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder, then let there be the ligament placed on that area and towards that shoulder.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Align that with ease and your work, and then when it has been aligned according to how you need it and a good application is applied, then strengthen that if no abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs, then smooth the compression within the seventh day, and place over him unwoven woolen bandage with grease oil until the abscess rests, and then strengthen that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of strengthening that is to place bandage over the fracture, and then wrap the naval cloth around the bandage; adjust the arm onto that assistant, and let his hand opened on his muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the sheet and strengthen on the helper's arms so that the arm is in the place of stars, if you do not prevent any cause from breaking the bones.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that you pause on the fracture that star which is more close and more robust than the other stars; and place between each star the width of a finger, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage add three fingers from every side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And place strength on the stars along the constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the skull.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your constriction over the site of the fracture be more stretched.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when much stretching occurs on the fracture, the constriction is smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you place the position of the stars and constriction as we have said when restoring the member to its original location, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a wound from pus, then let the constriction and stars rest for one day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the ligament in all directions for three days so that it does not occur at the site of pain or swelling; or prohibit food from reaching the member due to excess constriction; and then correct all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May if you are uncertain about stability that none of this happens, then do not loosen the ligature but wait approximately three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's back rest on their buttocks, and their hands are on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the helper's full bed of wool evenly, and consider at all times of the night or day whether the figure of the broken member is not disturbed or dissolved, or whether the ligament has softened; then correct this altogether with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food of the patient according to the order which we have in front, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until strength begins; and then adjust how you thicken the food for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	That the strength of the helper and the patient's chest is strong after 40 days; then adjust so that they are released, give them baths and use ointments which correct those.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is laid bare and rubbed, then do not release that ligament and stars in one day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Regarding the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones which are called the ulna and the radius; among them, one is small, and that's what we call the wrist bone, while the other is large and it rests on the smaller one at the lower part above.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if only the larger bone or the smaller one is broken in strength, they are broken at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when only the smaller bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the break is in the bone below, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the smaller ulna above, then it's convenient for the doctor to restore it; you should adjust a small extension within which that will be equalized.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if the large bone is broken, then consider placing an extension more vigorously.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken at the same time, then you should apply the traction much stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And consider placing the hand's figure for restoring it and extend its extension on a pillow; have the wrist of your hand above all other fingers, but more so than all others, and the foot should be at least as high as sitting in a chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And have a pillow in front of it either straight or inclined for the foot not to undertake labor.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let the minister extend his arm from the lower part above towards the patient's hand or ligament, and another minister extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And let the doctor equalize the bones within which he shortens that according to the best figure that can be done.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is a deformity in the bone, then you should adjust all parts in their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears an isolated deformity that breaks the continuity and is not within your hope for restoring it, then you should act on it according to the method which we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	And if the fracture is with pus, I have already addressed this to a separate chapter, and so take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess caut occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you lay out a cloth covered with a wadded bandage made of roasting oil and white wax, so that it is midway between thickness and subtlety; place a cloth over that with subtle constriction until pus can drain; then remove the bandage and apply an ointment prepared from powder of moli in honey; then place stars; let the star placed above that fracture be more close and more robust.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of stars on an arm can be seen in major dispositions, or if it's a break in one bone or both bones at the same time.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then press your constriction over the spot of the bone with strong and violent pus, and when the constriction is as high as possible on the parts above the fracture or on the lower parts of it, press the constriction slightly moistened for as long as the reminiscence of it begins in the onset of the head.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the sheets that envelop over the fracture be damp cloths, and not hard or scratchy. The consistency of the paste applied to them should be neither too thin nor too thick but just right between fine and coarse, as we have previously described.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the skin for about several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs that requires correction, such as the pain occurring in the limb itself, then you should immerse the limb in cold water until the pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be strained until it rests, and then return the constriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the constriction has already been softened and the bone has grown back as it should, then correct all this with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition cannot reach the limb due to excess constriction, then immerse that slightly and let it rest for several days until the nutrition flows back to that area, then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If no other cause befalls the patient as we have mentioned, then do not immerse it in water for about 20 days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And let the hand of the patient be suspended by its own virtue of vigorous movements, and have it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or is slightly strengthened and restored in 28 days, all of which depends on the disposition of the muscles and the nature of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Regarding the restoration of fractures to the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	And know that in the wrist and joints of the fingers, fractures occur but do not happen to them without swelling from bruising.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or bruising occurs in the hand, then immerse that patient so they lie back and place their head on it according to equality, and then press the hand of them onto that stretched out.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And let the minister extend the broken bones, and the doctor equalize those within which they become thickened to good thickening.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then immerse and press on the plaster and stopper, if there is no pus to be seen. And then place stones according to the amount of the area, and you have already enveloped that in a cloth of it.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the tear is in the inward parts beneath the palm of the hand, then you make a semblance of a hole in the cloth and order the patient to hold that against their torn palm; have it strengthened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the stone of the heart be in the cloth where it rests, so that the heart is applied to the palm; strengthen that according to how you see fit.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the outward parts, then immerse it with a stone and another stone from that part left on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then press on the constriction, as the hand is twisted between the fingers against their skin.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there occurs a fracture to one of the joints of the fingers, if it is just the finger joint, it should be equalized according to how you see fit and then strengthened against the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight stone under him so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in that of the middle part or in the index finger, or the little finger, or the ring finger, then it should be equalized and held at the point where it's bent; or they are all held together continuously, which is better; or place a small stone under it, as we have said for the joint.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your restoration and before that, the disposition of pus to be avoided - during your operation - when there occurs any cause of those things, according to what has been recounted about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Capitol Chapter XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Regarding the restoration of fractures to the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone with bruised swelling is broken and is perceived by the sensation as converting to the part in front and becoming above the pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of this is done so that muscle strengthens over the fracture and other muscles away from the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And let the minister extend all the muscle in its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	And if they are near the end of the thigh bone, then let the muscle be extended to the knee part of the quadriceps tendon, so that the extension fits into them, and the other muscles away from the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is near the knee, then let the muscle be done towards the patellar tendon, and make the extension to the parts away from it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor equalizes the bone in both of their hands until you reduce that according to natural likeness and the bone is connected through good connection; then immerse it with plaster and constriction if there is no occurrence of pus on the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it happens in their abscess, then you leave that alone for a few days until the abscess heals under the cautery, and soon return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The constriction of his leg is made: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it back and forth two or three times, remove any excess; then wrap the area within which it reaches the ankle and toe.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert the long needle between the leg and its area near the ankle to the parts you left, allowing the ends of the needle from the insertion point past above the two parts, then rotate around the leg and knee until excess of the band is removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place on the leg at the spot of that fracture stars, and place one star over the bone at the knee area.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill in the gaps between the knee and leg with thick cloths, so that the constriction can be凝固.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And apply a strong constriction in the middle over the fracture area with three or four layers, and as you move further away from the fracture site, your constriction becomes smaller, lighter, and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend both ends of the needle to the insertion points between which it reaches into the chest cavity, and strengthen both ends of the stars from the other side so that the thread does not slip out of its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And leave the constriction in place, so that it does not cause erosion or abscess under heat nor swelling and resembles those; if any reason arises from these, then you must attend to them, and adjust whatever happens as closely as possible according to what we have discussed numerous times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there's a protrusion in the bone where it is placed, then cover such that you equalize it according to what's possible; and if not, do something on them and keep that position, and treat with the one preceding the memory until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some times strengthen this leg fracture from the knee in another way that it is adjusted to your stars, as we have said in the guide and on the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of his leg done this way, do not cause lameness in the patient; and if it is restored alone, then for another reason that applies to their knee, then it becomes necessary that he walks with difficulty from time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the leg is strengthened in about ten days or one or two months, and all this varies according to the diversity of people's bodies and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On restoring the fracture of the ankle bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	And know that a fracture of the ankle bone is often caused by sudden injuries; however, it happens in various ways due to accidents.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if it happens to his fracture, then it is merely a crack or bruise in its parts; and this is due to coldness or heat exposure, and everything depends on the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of his leg is that it must be equal to what breaks in its parts according to these, where it should be added and joined as much as possible for harmony and ease of construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And place the plaster and put on that round star if you need it; strengthen above with constriction as convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the arrangements we have recommended in other fractures, such as heat under the cautery and similar to those that oppose themselves against every accident so that they are convenient for healing within it.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On restoring the fracture of the knee joint.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	And know that in the knee joint are two bones, of which one is thick and named by its common name as the knee. The other is subtle and named easily.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to all kinds of fracture in the same way as they occur in both bones of the arm, and thus restoration is done for him in the same way as for the arm when equalized, and his operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken at once, the knee joint becomes dislocated in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if it breaks the more delicate bone, the knee joint is dislocated backward.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if it breaks the thicker bone, you need to find that out yourself, and those are reasons not within your expertise.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And apply extension, alignment, and realignment according to this equalization for the stars.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the knee joint fracture is not too serious and has no distinct symptoms, let the extension be mild and more gentle, and apply to your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the knee joint there is some reason for operation on the arm, and that's when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation; then you take weights of wood that are placed under your causes which are placed in solitude, and made evenly from palm branches; lift those to whose small roughness they belong, and not those with hands, and make them as long as the knee joint is, and into the ankle among the rest.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And wrap around each cloth in two layers according to the length of it, place one over the knee joint area of one side and the other on the corresponding side of the other side, and be under the ankle within the area below the chest.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place the two stars in three locations of each extremity and at the middle point, for this structure prohibits leaning to the right or left part, it stands by good station.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And after the first floss is applied according to the length of the tendon, then place the tendon on them so that it retains its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially ensure you do this in a fracture, and when that is treated properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And also consider each day the tendon and study it further to understand, and you should keep it free of abscesses or inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause from those happens, then place your treatment so that it enters into what needs healing until it is cured.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	About the fracture of the heel and bones of the foot and fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fracture of the heel does not happen in entirety; sometimes fractures occur to the bones of the foot; and fractures happen less often to the fingers, but they do not happen to them except during the months of pregnancy.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures happen to the bones of the foot and they are elevated among themselves, then the patient should lie with their foot on prepared ground as usual.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And also place one foot on what is elevated from those bones, and apply pressure with the others, press, and equalize them among themselves until they turn into the locations.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And also place bandages and stops over it, and place the patient's belly on a small table with two cushioned ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that on the foot in its downward structure, since you have enveloped that with cloths and against other causes from which you need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed for the patient, then you release the ligament, where you will find the bones equalized, or they are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some fingers are broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I have advised you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And also place the broken finger with a star according to the length of the finger, and be more gentle with them. And also place your foot on this table which I have advised you about before, and strengthen that in its downward structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if that which is broken in the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a star of its quantity enveloped in lion's cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the ends of the table to let the belly rest for good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which we have discussed with you in the other fractures of accidents that we have talked about, and apply this treatment to all accidents according to what has been discussed.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	About the fracture of the shin bone and the bone of the tarsus, and the knee joint of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the shin bone of a woman is broken, then have her lie down on her back, and also incline that towards the right side just slightly, and keep it supported behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife raises the calf of the leg, and does this in the shin bone as it's expected; and make the woman bend down, and lift her right foot gradually, for all this is to be done until the bent part of the shin is behind and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And also place powder on her back, and when she wants to urinate, let her hold the leg in a relaxed way and she can urinate, then return it according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, and return to her initial powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or approximately that time until it is healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an onion and place over her heel a cannula of wool; and immerse the entire bladder into her shin, then blow forcefully through the cannula until the bladder is inflated inside the shin, which returns the fracture.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And also fill with calf and stay for some days according to what we have advised until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the tarsus in a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and adjustment what we have advised for the bone of the thigh.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight does not get hidden in these nearby fractures and rarely happens, especially among those who have some study and understand my free speech; for that fracture means to you in the major processes of direction in its restoration and adjustment, so please understand it well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And for the knee joint in men when it is broken, take a large bag of sand and place the knee inside; and also cover it with a cloth wrap, keep it wrapped, and let it rest for three days or approximately that time, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	About the restoration of fractures when they are treated properly.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who experiences fractures in treatment, and especially if the bone is large such as the elbow bone or the humerus, or similar to that, you should take care of it and perform bloodletting on it immediately when your conditions for bloodletting are met or they testify like what we have said previously.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound is bleeding, then cover it with pressure from you until your dust, which you spread over it as thyme, is applied; if another cause is not presented to you.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And start to restore the fracture on that day itself, do not prolong this if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess occurs through the cautery, then allow the restoration of the patient within 9 days until the abscess is drained, and do not approach it on the third day and in total over four days; this will prevent causing further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone is imminent over the exposed wound, then cover it with pressure to reduce and equalize that near your own fingers for easy manipulation and with a slight extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared for and the alignment of the wound near your own fingers, then reduce that with your fingers; this tool is made of iron, its length is about seven or eight digits, and its width is according to the size of the wound; thus, it is necessary for a doctor to have three or four of these according to the amount needed for treatment in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it is round, and if it's in the slight hardness that doesn't bend, you must compress on it during the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And if it's at an acute end with a margin on each of its extremities; and let the top be of uniform thickness, and inside the middle part should have the patient's size.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It's named in Greek "volentz hernia", thus it's a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So cover it with the patient's extremity raised above the imminent bone's extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that in a groove until the bone returns, and equalize it with some sort of alignment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is subtle and does not take that tool for good access, then cover it with your need to insert the end of this bone into a place where the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then cut it into whatever suits you from among the scalpels which we mentioned; or cut it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And remove that which sticks out from the bone of roughness and of small scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and upon this reduction the patient experiences severe pain; then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and from then on, give this advice to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration to the bone is completed, then immerse a bandage in vi wet with a black antiseptic; and especially during summer, do not cover the wound with ointment or any other cause that might lead to infection or corrosion on it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And when you finish your process of restoring the bone, administer ointments at that time, and leave the wound exposed until you insert the thread with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And use all caution not to damage the wound near the fracture, which is what many doctors do, and causes death or deterioration of their patients, this is how it heals.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your constriction is slight, soft, different from the constriction of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents as we have advised, and find pain in that area, then do not cover it with those bandages, but use hard cloth instead of bandages and strengthen it around them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins to heal around one or two days, so that there is a formation of flesh in it, then remove from under the cloth which you had placed over that with oil, and administer calgus (calf's foot extract), ointments which according to our custom medicate wounds; thus like tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should consider that the wound is checked every morning and evening until it becomes consolidated and hardened; so that the healing can flow from the patient to the parts left, with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes days to heal and it's not consolidated or the flesh is not removed from it by the formation of new tissue, then you should know that here are the reasons why you need to continue treating the wound with remedies.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And those are the reasons that have separated and removed them; those that do not separate from their source and cause pain by affecting the limb, you must push to remove those as much as possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens that the wound becomes or remains infected, it's inflammation, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then cover it with one of those as you see fit for your treatment; this is preceded by a narrative in its chapter on surgical procedures.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from that onwards, ensure the best position and present your plan: when the bone is broken, elevate the limb as if it were a bone of a thigh or helper and similar to those in large limbs; do not assume recovery from this, nor the removal that any cuts might cause leading to death; leave it there until something strong falls down by itself within about 20 days or 30. And then treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it as such.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of dislocation that occurs in the aftermath of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Dislocations occur during the aftermath of fracture healing, especially near joints, and are marked by distortion of the body's parts; and you must prohibit the limb from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the dislocation is recent and administer remedies that have a calming effect such as aloes, eggs, vinegar, wine, or oil. Look at them and choose one or more of those; if they have a soothing effect internally, or if they improve egg whites, or add vinegar to them, place some of these over the dislocation on a cloth, and apply pressure with good compression on it.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And allow the dislocation to heal without letting it relax for several days; then release it and repeat another method until the dislocation is reduced; or press a sheet of lead over it from above, as lead has the property of reducing all that inflates in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if the dislocation has already become bone and is hard to reduce, you may have to start it gradually. Then divide the dislocation along the most superior part of the body, and remove the excess or cut that area with some razors until it softens; and treat it while it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On restoring fractures when they are restored and then treating the delicate and fragile member according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, then you treat the delicate and fragile member according to its natural state, otherwise, only such causes occur: among which one is an abundance of tissue fluid and lack of movement in what should move; or due to excessive constriction of the tissues where nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excess inflammation; or due to unnecessary movements out of their time; or due to weakness within the patient's body and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give the patient rest, so that nutrition multiplies within him; and apply baths; and immerse it in warm water and camphor.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws nutrition to it, or continue its treatment with camphor in water baths, until nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of curved bones when they are restored in a tortuous manner, and you prohibit their operation from what prevails.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member has already been restored during healing of its curvature and overabundance in the curved bone and dislocation, and it is due to this deformation of shape of the limb, but nonetheless, the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then what you receive from that person who believes that their limb should be of new curvature.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Perhaps there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly condemned, leading to great fear of its symptom which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Perhaps if there is a limpness and dislocation that are recent, you should have them soaked in camphor water containing softening herbs such as mallow leaves and mustard seeds, or similar; then apply it repeatedly to the limb with this softening treatment, like after well-done lard. Or take gum from holly roots and mix it with beeswax or olive oil, and apply that; or use figs with fat mixed with goose grease, or similar medicines called consolidating remedies, applied in this manner.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes, it dissolves with frequent light rubbing on the wet parts of the body at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Perhaps if curvature has already gone ahead and been made strong and turned into bone causing it necessary to treat it with iron, then you should have the pus above corrected and the continuous bone be dissolved, and this excess of dislocation is cut from that placing it on the bone using thin surgical instruments, and assistance is provided in this matter with diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speaking about dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any part of its location, so that it becomes prohibited from movement, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injuries to fall upon the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when a dislocation occurs, you should immediately force it to be reduced, and not delay reducing it; for if it is delayed, the place becomes stagnant and strength is required to make the reduction of dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be too soft or stretched during the process of stagnation, as it often causes seizures and sharp pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Perhaps when this happens, you should take the patient's flank, and then leave it so that the lump can rest; and have the limb soaked in warm water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire limb should be treated with what will bring its memory back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already and ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fractures; from the superior part of the body up until the posterior part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Regarding the treatment of a dislocated jaw, you do this.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So if the two jaws are dislocated and cannot be manipulated; and the total dislocation of both is carried out according to two methods: either they are partially repositioned at their places with a slight movement, and they become soft somewhat; or they are completely dislocated and fully separated, in which case they soften up near the joint part where saliva comes from the patient's mouth and it becomes impossible for them to have that nor can they close their mouth, and the tongue of the patient is enveloped by its own saliva.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, then in larger arrangements it returns by itself due to a small cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and full, then you must provide a minor reduction for it, and do not delay in doing so completely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the minister has the head of the patient, then let the doctor place his one hand on the side of the dislocated jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is from one part; or he should put both his hands simultaneously, if the dislocation is from two parts, and the rest of his instructions are given towards the other ends where they are outside; and command the patient to stop moving his jaws and let them go in any direction; and the doctor aligns the jaw and places the jaw inside until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult for it, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, so that a slight reduction of both occurs and do not delay in reducing both completely as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and has not become soft, then place on those powders of dry daphne with cerate, and it should be made with melted wax and oil; and let them be applied on facilitating the molasses.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient of the patient sleep on his back, his head between two pillows, so that he does not strain himself at the right or left side; and do not force him to endure any cause out of weakness; have his food be forbibicium lion, so when the pains are relieved and the jaws are numb, then let him relieve as much as he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered in comfort, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and breathing until the jaw is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated for some time and cannot be converted to their original places is difficult, then fevers occur frequently and soda becomes intense, and it strengthens the patient's stomach, and strengthens them and vomits pure colera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, then know that it is a loss; and if someone experiences this, they will die within three days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Regarding the reduction of a dislocated sternal notch and of the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternal notch is not dislocated within the chest due to its continuity with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated from its origin outside, which is felt.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then forcefully constrict the place with your palm, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and powder on that and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The end of that which is connected to the chest does not get dislocated on any day, then you must reduce and align it according to what we have said and according to how your equipment allows.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place an ointment and powder on that area, and apply it with strapping and rest until it heals.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment is the reduction of the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Regarding the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the place of the nipple to the left.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, this one is done quickly; and it is not dislocated in the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is mostly dislocated and situated outside at the left parts from the nipple, and especially in those where the muscles are few, slightly dislocated; but in those with large muscles, they sit out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to some people due to impact or blow, and the muscle of the patient becomes inflamed by a heat blister, and it is dislocated because of this.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	So you should perform this while you are well supported by the patient, and then proceed with treating him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And when you recognize the dislocation of it which is at the left parts from the nipple; then distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which you find among these various manifestations; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and leave the nipple of the muscle's head like one hole, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his own armpit, nor extend that further with all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it's dislocated you must move or reposition it, and then you will find it openly manifested, not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And with this dislocation, a slight reduction is done when the body is cool and the patient is still in pain.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is done by raising your hand to his parts above; and place your feet under him so that they stimulate him, and raise the joint with strength in its own place. The minister raises your hand and extends it towards him; then he stops that so gently returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If it is that after what we have said it does not return, and because of the eating habits that cause dislocation, for several days then soak the patient in hot water and give them a salve to soothe and moisturize so as if they were herbs of high altitude such as fenugreek and mint, in water, and give it to them.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the patient is to be laid down on his back and placed with their feet stimulated by you wait for the wool that has equal weight between levity and constraint. And the doctor places his arm over the spot, raises the muscle's head in strength, pulls the hand of the patient so it doesn't hurt the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so it doesn't get hurt by the parts below; then that almost returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that second this way: and make to be present a man who is longer than the patient, and he stands on his side of that later, and he inserts his muscle under your stimulating hand of the patient and raises the stimulation above him among where the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below of their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is slight, then make sure that what causes it to be suspended elsewhere, because of its gravity in this case, where dislocation returns almost immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And if reduced internally according to another method: and place in the ground a long pole with its end round like a mortar's pestle, not thick nor thin, and have the patient lie down next to the end of the rod, covering it with linen. The patient stands according to the length of the pole, and extend their hand at the parts below on the other side; then extend their body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it's difficult to reduce you due to all the causes we've mentioned, then use this cure: and take a pole of which the length is that of two arms, and its width should be four digits, and the thickness of it should be soft like a nipple according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then cover the round end with linen so that the pole doesn't hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then have the patient lie down with their nipple area covered by linen, and extend their hand or arm over the pole in between the parts below, and cover the pole on the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And have the arm lay on a ladder according to its width, and the hand extends in between the parts below, while the rest of the body hangs from the other side, so that the joint returns almost immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of the patient is completed according to any method that is possible for you, then make sure you place under his stimulation a wool waiting cloth of equal quantity; and have an ointment prepared from moly powder mixed with albumin of egg spread over the entire muscle area, so as it's stirred above, and strengthen the stimulation part in constraint moderately; and let the mixture be spread on the ointment, and the hand of the patient is attached to his neck, and left undisturbed, making sure not to hurt the hand of the patient for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And make sure that the food of the patient is limited for some time, while the member is comforted, which makes it easier to heal him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And have the food given more to about seven or five times and exercise is done with movements. And if it's closed and not softened, then he is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that affects him or for another reason, then make sure to apply a cautery at three locations, according to what was said in the section on cautery in this treatise.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are released but not closed, and the plaster and constraint are reduced over him for some times, but it isn't closed or bound and he can't lift that arm above his parts, then you will realize that the nerves of him, which are at the tip of the muscle, are already cut or stretched or softened, and you'll understand that the joint will never be properly fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	And regarding the dislocation of that which is caused from the foot or the breast or behind the parts, the reduction is done with pressure and extension towards the muscles, so it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another constraint should be applied there, and treat that until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is heavy healing in the limb and late recovery of his movements, then the patient uses hot baths until that heaviness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; when it is dislocated in all directions, but especially towards the front and back. The dislocation of it cannot be concealed from you whether you feel its movement or touch it according to any figure it may be dislocated. And when you adjust the dislocated shoulder to its place, this is openly declared by you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch at all with that its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And know that with the shoulder bones, reduce the dislocation as soon as it reaches its pit point. If it reaches the pit point, reducing it becomes difficult, and strength is not completely restored; especially when it's towards the back, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, and causing pain, deaths are often brought by that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when this is possible to reduce, is that your hand be extended towards both sides, and your arm be extended, and the doctor's hands are on the shoulder, and you leave it there. And you press the joint against the heels of his hands in turn, or against the base of his palm inside which he turns back into its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is towards the front parts, then returns thus that bends his hand to his hand, striking the shoulder inside his palm base.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and hard force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that is why two ministers extend their arms, and have this support from two ministers so that it does not exceed the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then have his arm turned around entirely, because it is enveloped in a folded long cloth or blanket.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply oil to it so that these causes help in the lubrication of the joint making it easier; and then press the joint firmly from inside until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the restoration of it is that it be placed on that bed with stiffness and mobility in the album of hog oil, and be extended in the straightness of the limb, and his arm be hung from the neck, and left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then let it be freed; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you free this muscle from him and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you reapply the plaster and this muscle, and leave that for a few days until it is extended; and then release that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if it happens to you that gravity interferes with the reduction of the joint, and his position is in motion, then apply moisturizing in bath and subtle friction, or compressing, while it is rubbed; or place over the joint, on this greasy part of movement; and then tie it up, and leave him on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then keep him there, and place him in the bath; and when he is clean, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then reapply this oily part of movement over him once, and then again, and thirdly.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread within the stomach's cavity, inside its limits.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place over that wet and scraped hole in the flesh and press on it; and do this several times, where that is moist and reduces to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Elbow of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy, its opposite applies to other joints, but however it must be fast in the reduction when it is dislocated before the point becomes stuck or when a pit point occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is that you hold the elbow joint of the hand on a table and have one minister extend his hand, and the doctor pauses his hand or palm over the edge of the joint, and press that until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	And however it must be considered if the palm has already been placed in the belly of the hand, then the patient lays both hands on a table with extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, then the position of the hand of him inherently on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, it's good; and otherwise, then strengthen that with plaster over the pit point and leave him; and do not repeat this, because otherwise you can neither bear nor control the reduction of it as days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	And however the joint is adjusted according to its tortuosity; and you don't notice any cause in the patient, but that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and there's no use in him except for the reduction with a cautery around it and strength you confer some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And once the elbow has returned, then place upon that plaster which we have used, and leave him strengthened for several days; and then let it be released and left and the hand of him exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient's movements are still restricted and occur with some gravity, then moisten that area with water and perform a few friction movements, during which they feel better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some movements cause dislocation of the fingers in all directions.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger is dislocated towards the two of the palm or towards the belly of the patient, then you move the finger and push back the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And place your hand on top of the finger, hang that part from which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And suspend that (part), extend that until its length is equal to that one day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it heals at night, continue this according to that narration, and do not cease to slide that (part) during the day and exercise with movements, and continue this at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same as if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and leave that towards that part, perform your first operation on this, until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the hips on both sides.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to any of the hips on both sides or the neck that a complete dislocation occurs, and if there is much bruising in those areas, then there is no cure for this, as death follows the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient is outside against his will, and he cannot retain it; or some friction movements soften certain parts of him or two of his legs or both arms, or one of these; or if you rub a hip in its place, then rubbing movements cause the removal of those to four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	So it has been rubbed towards the parts behind and it is called glibness.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	And the treatment of this is that you then consider whether the glibness occurs in infancy, so there is no cure for it and there is no healing of the whole.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	And in those that come by fracture or impact or similar to them, the ancient ways of treatment were said to be long-winded, for which the main point returns to profitability; but I have made it brief from the one that many excuse too much of him, based on my familiarity with his middle exposition, about which I have elaborated and structured this using various tools from him where I show this and expand upon that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that glibness occurring in the front part of the foot doesn't heal or cure that; similarly for the one that happens between the two legs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only those are cured that occur in both properly as I have mentioned.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient should be laid out on his face with his arms extended close to his sides, and have his legs submerged in water so that they don't get cold.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight staff in the middle, standing it on the ground near the elbow joint around his head, and another staff at an angle supporting his feet at the other end of the leg.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And let the attendant hold the staff, and do not let it be too loose in a pit; and another attendant holds the other according to that manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the patient's head and tie on a lion skin tightly; extend the end of the skin to the staff which should be under his head, and lay it there; and tighten the other skin on his buttocks with his legs, and place them in the second staff which is under his feet; and adjust all the skins and lay those there.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the attendant extends the skin to the junction of the staff, and do not allow the two staffs and the skins at their places where they are placed to become too tight, but rather not as tightly as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his hands on the hip with strength until it returns, or he places one of them on that side and let's adjust his legs to the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it doesn't return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is approximately three arms, and dig into the wall as we said that there is a place near the patient where one can enter from the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the edge of the table on the hip, and the doctor holds his feet at the other end, and streches there until the hip is pulled and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the circle which is turned in the hand; and that you place on the ground should be head of the patient at the end of the leg two staffs, whose length is one arm, and place his head at the end of the leg symmetrically two staffs; and let there be a distance between each staff as long as one palm, and this has been done in each staff to pull it clockwise, and each should be firmly placed on the ground so that it doesn't move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And add one more staff around which is the circle, and let it be turned in both grooves of the two staffs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the extremity of this is a vein in which the blood forms, its length being as long as one's hand when it's being stirred; and in the two other veins there's something akin to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And reinforce the ligaments that you have tightened in the thighs of the patient in this vein which should be at the head of him, and the ligaments that you have tightened on his hips in this artery which should be at his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And for each joint place an attendant who twists the joints with his hands, and the doctor adjusts the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how you should do it for the joint:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine has been returned and the area is adjusted, then coat with a dry poultice made from almond meal, and cover; and place on the poultice until it fills a table of three digits or about that many, and its length should be as much as the area of yellow fat, and over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And bind it with the ligament that we said, and use the patient to intake subtle nourishment so that they recover.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any lingering risk at the site of the injury at the end of recovery, then prepare to administer medicines that purify and clean up for a long time after the table has been used, which we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead has been administered in that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some inflammations may occur at the end of the spines of both sides, and it is irritated by that dislocation; and that bone which already inflames so that it should not be assumed that this medicine, which will cause you to suddenly die, should be administered to them.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated thigh.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not require only dislocation, but nothing like what happens to other joints with small movement and curvature occurs to them.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the thigh can be dislocated in four ways: it is dislocated towards the inside parts, or towards the outside parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated towards the inside parts, and slightly towards the front parts or towards the back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation towards the inside parts is that when you align the healthy leg with the other leg, it becomes longer and the diseased part is more prominent than the healthy one. The patient cannot bend their knee, they have to straighten their leg, this can only be seen in the area where there's inflammation due to heat from a cautery, because by then their thigh bone has already passed here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign for that which experiences dislocation towards the outside parts is that his accidents are against this incident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign for that which experiences dislocation towards the front is that he extends his healthy leg as if in a circle, however, it does not bend at the knee where there's pain, and if you try to force him to move forward he can't do it; and his urine is retained and his walking is prevented, and your should have him walk on his toe.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign for that which experiences dislocation towards the back is that he doesn't extend his knee, nor can he bend forward as when he bends over; and his leg is shorter than the other one, and his walking becomes smoother, and the tip of his foot should be in that spot.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The proper reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider them. If the dislocation is old and has been there for a long time, then when it is already adjusted by your own means in terms of its position, then it should not be reduced completely; thus, do not assume anything from this particular treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the case where dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocation, then you have to do what reverses the joint, extends it towards inside parts and outside parts, and moves it to the right and left sides; this force returns it without needing any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it doesn't return in this manner, then prepare for strength and extend the leg of the patient from that direction, or on their knees, or under any muscle that's attached above the knee; and another attendant extends his hand upwards to place their fingers over their knees. And reinforce with a ligament over the tendon of the foot, and have another attendant hold onto the end of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it's extension of the leg or towards inside parts up to the elbow joint, or from behind to the joint of the buttocks, or from back to the joint of the thigh.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if all these extensions happen at once while lifting their foot from the ground, and it hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns as we've said, it is good; and otherwise, then each type requires its own treatment according to its specific procedure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the self-reduction process of your own dislocated thigh, if the dislocation is towards inside parts, you should make it bend back on its lateral side; and place ligaments over the tendon of the foot in that area which is between the knee cap and the spot where there's inflammation due to heat from a cautery; and extend the ligament upwards from the part near the elbow joint up to the next joint.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes hold of the patient's arms, softens the fatty area of the bad thigh, and extends all parts outward through vigorous extension, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is for a slighter treatment of the limb which is reduced like other methods, but to a lesser extent.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	May it be excused if you do not comply with this method of treatment for the whole body, then apply that both feet of the patient are heated at the same time, gently and slightly, on both ankles and both calves.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each one be according to the quantity of four fingers, and let the bad leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And place the bad leg hanging from the head of the staff, and have it in your right hand; let the length of this ground be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to hold down the head of the thigh, and have it hanging with the bad leg another young man, and the other young man holds up the thigh with great strength, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And for the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation outward, apply that the bad leg pushes against the ground as we have prescribed in the warm bath; and strengthen the ligaments over the bad thigh and on its feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two staffs, one on the foot of the patient and the other on the head; and place adjusted staffs on each side of the buttock with wet cloths wrapped around them, so that the bad leg does not get damp as the staff is between the thighs, because you must extend the parts left outwards without being pulled back.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And for each minister, extend according to their part, and the doctor with his hand encircles the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if you comply with the reversal, it will go very well; and otherwise, hold onto that carefully and thus as we have said in warm bath for that equality.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And let the bad leg push against its knees quite gently.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then let the leg be slightly extended, and as per this half of the narrative on the buttock; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the bad thigh, and roughly forces that with the other hand, and through that pressure he keeps that extension to the rear parts at the calf.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then do not let the bad leg be extended to the rear parts, and it's lifted on the ground; having thus place it under a hard cause, as you would for laying when the width of this is dislocated in the front parts, according to how we said about placing him between two widths; and it's over his face and its ligaments are stretched, as we said almost exactly.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let compression be administered on the table at the place where it lifts the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is completed as described - and the sign of the reduction being not hidden from you, that you extend both thighs of it, and when you equalize those in size and the bad leg extends its thigh and expands that sesamoid, then you know that this part has returned according to what's been done; and then you adjust the two limbs and apply plaster and stretch as much as needed so that no swelling occurs in any parts; and hold back the bad leg for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then untie the plaster, examine it, and compare one thigh to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And when you see those equalities in appearance, then you know that the dislocation has been corrected, and thus allow the bad leg to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then you return and plaster that again, stretch it according to your first correction, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and have him walk about in both places for some days until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the buttock.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The buttock is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outwardly at the parts, inwardly at the parts, and more outwardly at the parts than inwardly; it is not dislocated at the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation in this is that you command the bad leg to apply its thigh to the buttock; then you know that the buttock is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the bad leg straight, so that it already extends its thigh, if possible; stick your two hands to his face and pause his foot between your feet; then have another minister apply his buttock against your palms, pull those together with strength between your fingers over his buttock, and have him extend his leg when the buttock returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of restoration is that his thigh sticks to the buttock at rest without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that, have the thigh stick to the buttock, and let those rest for one bend for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not use the patient for walking for a few days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of you is justified for me, then administer strength extension from those who in the treatment of the hip have been preceded by narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the femur.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The femur is sometimes displaced due to slight force, and in other cases it is displaced according to position, and the displacement of you occurs either internally or externally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the displacement of you is that when you press the femur towards the part where it is displaced.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of the displacement of you is a minor readjustment; it must be extended with support for your hands and maintained until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the treatment of you when it is displaced according to position, you should make the patient lie straight, have one of those on your legs strong and brave from that part behind both feet at the middle point of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then take your right hand to the top of the patient's foot and your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the place of the cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and from left twice, and extend your left hand; and push the feet of the foot to the right side according to the cavity these work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do those two movements as we have discussed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the feet towards the cavity at the third movement, and you are at the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two movements according to this manner, and if you make the patient lie straight, it's good; and otherwise, then on you perform the operation again, when that has returned.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If for you the reduction of you is prohibited in this manner that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a piece of wood under them on solid ground, and place it between your thighs, and you have already enveloped around you sheet so as not to move the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the attendant of you has their thighs ready, and another servant extends their feet with their hands or on a mat that lies over the back of the foot; and extend each attendant against the extension of his pair, and the blanket is lying between the patient's thighs, so that the body of you does not be pulled towards the lower parts opposite to its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor equalizes the displacement with his hands, and another attendant holds the healthy thigh in the lower parts, where the displacement returns by ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the displacement returns and its declaration of your health is confirmed with the reduction of you, then pause the plastering and strengthen that by vigorously placing it on wood, and place the foot onto the cavity.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And when you fear or protect from the nerves that are behind on top of the femur, for the muscle over there not to be vigorous and harm that strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then let him rest for two or three days; and if the muscle is softened, strengthen that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then on the third day or the fourth, untie him and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is forced to go before that space, then there must not be doubt that the displacement will not dissolve and corrupt in him, and anything that does not receive treatment should be avoided.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that you get an abscess in the femur, then you should administer according to what preceded our narrative, in another place of treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Make sure that which is displaced is equal to a little extension of your hands; and what is not difficult, before it is minor.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the displacement is in some joints of both feet, then you should make the patient lie on their back over a location equal to half of the ground or on a table, and be standing as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then stand on your feet, place your hand over what you are pressing from the joints, and apply pressure with your foot while bending it within so that it returns; and see that he is already equalized and does not appear in the pressing location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the abdomen of you with a table that takes all the foot, on which there are two ends, and strengthen it with good structure and firmness for three days; and then untie him and make rest from walking for several days, until he is strengthened and his recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of displacement that occur from inflammation or from fracture, or at any time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those occurs, and you apply yourself to the treatment of that and in restoring him, several movements follow death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And do not presume on the treatment of you, but that which is wise in the art, long used, merciful and compassionate; slow, not impulsive or presumptuous; who uses medicines that apply to abscesses alone, leaves the patient to divine judgment, rather than to any other for whom you hope recovery from illness, with alleviation of malaise, and in which you have some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to make such an effort that you reduce him during the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a boil.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the member returns according to our wish, then administer treatment which allows for the use of a pointed cautery and care for the wound in such a way that it suits your needs using dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is like a fracture and happens in the separated bones, then you perform their surgery, and do it as we have said in the simple diseases of this that were described in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And according to your skill, avoid or guard as you see fit in the midst of fear along the paths that were guided by my teaching; for what is better for you, you should do with your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more healthful for your true self, which you will see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bucajim, may God bless them.
Amen.	Amen.
