Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	This begins the words of Al-Baghdadi.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, I give you this book as a gift, which is the last of medical science, for the benefit of your health, and through its explanations, and thanks to its statements, in my view it seems fitting that I complete this treatise for you, which is part of my surgical operation, or surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation on oneself is confined to our region and in our times it's entirely private, there exists great danger with this knowledge, and its traces remain; and there would not have been a lot of progress without some small descriptions in ancient books, which rectify many errors and misconceptions where their principles are closed for understanding and extends the effort and skill required.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should renew this treatise in a manner akin to exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for the introduction of forms of the tools used like cautery and other equipment required for surgery, and for preparation thereof, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why no skilled artisan operates on his own hand in our times might be that the art of medicine is extensive, and one must practice it before becoming proficient in the science of anatomy which Gualia described. He knew about the youthfulness of body parts and their forms, as well as their connections and separations; he had knowledge of bones, nerves, and glands, including the number of these and how to manipulate them; he understood pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the sites for their insertion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And that's why Hippocrates said about it that in speech there is a difference, but more importantly in the work and especially in the art of one's own hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already mentioned this at the beginning of this book; whoever does not know what we have told about anatomy, should be avoided from falling into an error which would lead to many deaths, as I have seen too many cases like this, where some were trained in this science and abandoned it for that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I have seen a skilled doctor who accidentally caused an inflamed abscess on the neck of a woman, and cut some neck arteries so that there was a large amount of bleeding, resulting in the woman dying among his patients.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who almost killed a man by removing a large stone from his condition, and the stone was big, it hurt him and he removed that stone with a piece of bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I already sought to remove it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient under him, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land for surgery, and operated on a black soldier who had suffered from his fracture in the leg; due to the doctor's lack of knowledge, he removed the fracture, covering it with dust and plaster over the wound, without allowing air into the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he let it heal according to his desires, and he applied bandages, and let it dry for several days as commanded that we loosen the bandage; and this happened also when bone and flesh were infected with abscesses, resulting in loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I sought help from you and prepared to remove the bandage, thus achieving calmness and alleviation of his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But unfortunately the corruption had been confirmed in the limb, so I couldn't stop it and it continued to spread through the body of the patient, which was dangerous.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who punctured an inflamed abscess and it became worse for the lord of his patient over some days.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cold cauterization is pure of melancholy humor, so it doesn't affect everything, but rather it is a body part that suffers from being affected by everything.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that self-operation be divided into two distincts: one associated with health and the other where there is danger in major positions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already discussed this in every part of this book about the operation where there is error and fear; so it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let that happen, so the pages don't accuse you of speaking or dishonesty.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take your tools in the service of God and for protection, and your patients with joy and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through God's grace to gain salvation and a prosperous succession, let the terrible illnesses with difficult recovery stay away from your patients, keep your tools prepared for what you fear, so that stability remains in your faith and in your name; which is more lasting to your glory, better than in this world and at last in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia already said in several of his writings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Don't treat bad patients with bad doctors," he said.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter organized in the section about feet, concerning the forms of tools and instruments for cautery, and what is necessary in operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning drying and puncturing, as well as suction cups, plagues, extraction of arrows, and similarity to those, entirely organized and detailed about the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and repositioning, as well as the treatment of dislocations and similarity to those treatments; an organized chapter about the head in relation to the bones, and the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Regarding the use of a hot cautery and acute medicine, recalling the operation procedure.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Here begins the treatise on all freedom.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Let me tell you about the quality of those cauteries and their consequences, as well as when it is forbidden to use a cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I say that the discussion about the quality of cautery's effects and its aftermath is long-winded and tedious for those with knowledge, subtle in science, and hidden by mystery; many wise men have already spoken on this topic, differing from each other, and for my part, it's enough to mention a small aspect of their teachings, fearing over-explanation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cautery strengthens the entire body universally in terms of its material or double materials, except for two components, which are parts concerning the double material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the component of the tail and the body's dry part there is material; some say that cautery strengthens that, while others say its opposite, that cautery isn't suitable for ailments that are due to quality and dryness. For nature is quality and dryness, and it's inconvenient when an ailment's tail and dryness are cured by that which causes dryness and harm would be its cure.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite argue that with cautery one strengthens youth in all tail and dry ailments that appear in men's bodies. When you compare a man's body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that a man's body is dried out.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to this discussion, which I have already discovered several times through experience.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not wish for this to be discussed again in detail as it has already been elaborated upon in the section on cautery techniques and exercises, where one comes to know about the diversity of human bodies and the positioning of ailments among them, their causes, occurrences, accidents, and the timeline associated with these issues.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other parts of the body, there's no need for concern, especially with wet and cold ailments, which many doctors have already discussed about, not differing on whether youth from cautery is beneficial in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know this, children, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its good qualities lie in the use of hot medicines with cautery. For fire is simple, its action only reaches the limb being cauterized and does not spread to other limbs unless there's a small harm involved.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of hot medicines spreads to those limbs that are distant from the source, and it strongly facilitates the arrival of difficult-to-heal illness in the diseased limb and weakens it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And the fire, due to its simplicity and goodness of substance, does not do this except cause excess. We have come to know this through experiments and a long service in studying the art, based on understanding the true causes; for that reason, I justify myself from going into much detail about this topic. But were it not for the fact that these secrets concerning fire and its operation within bodies, as well as your expulsion causing maladies to leave, are not fully understood through philosophical demonstration alone, they would serve you well in these discussions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know this, children, that there are disagreements regarding the time when cautery should be applied and they pause on the best period of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is suitable in any time period; because the harm due to temporary accidents is submerged by the youth brought about from that which comes with cautery, especially if it's used for pain or necessary pains that are strong and inflamed ones, which don't suffer from delay as feared by those that might cause mischief, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And you shouldn't consider this in your discussions, or children, those who only estimate such things as the common folk and lay doctors do, it's true that for every ailment healed by cautery not all times are suitable, and they hold onto this conclusion.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason isn't simply this when they worry about it, because cautery is merely a form of medicine that alters structure and dries out the humidity which is causing the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	And however, excessive cautery over medicine due to its value and virtue of operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it's possible that the ailment could return at some point in time, depending on the structure of the body and the location of its ailment, as well as its virtue, and what is prepared within the body from adding superfluities to it, as well as what gets absorbed by it through food and similar causes; otherwise, if the ailment being treated with cautery is a subtle ailment in limbs with few superfluities and humidity, just like dental cautery for pain and similar treatments, it's possible that such pain wouldn't return within it, rather, this happens on a small scale.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it's an outdated term, not something I understand in this context, they believe it's not a cure that improves with medicine nor any other cause leading to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is against this; and I understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, but it's only when administering methods of treatment in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, and improves towards that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here at this point, that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to my understanding which recognizes common and many doctors' views.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And it was said by the ancients that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they didn't say this merely due to the equality of gold and its limited substance compared to others.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And it was said that the place for cautery does not burn, as this is not absolutely true, I have already done this and found out that it does not do this in certain parts of the body rather than others; cautery with that (gold) is good and better than with iron too as they were saying; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it has not been clearly explained, it's heated according to the quantity you want for the hardness of the gold, and to receive freg. And if you place the fire on it, the gold melts due to the heat; and in some parts of the fire, several sheets are heated so that the artisan can work on it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, when performing cautery with iron, you should do so more gently and more precisely according to the nature of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot within these, for which I am asking you what you want from them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding cautery for head pain due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery process facilitates the cold and humidity to reach a sudden event of which there are two causes, they are caused by soda and multiplicity of traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the veins and ear canals, and multiplicity of sleep, and tooth pain and throat infection, and universally for all illness that comes from coldness, such as paralyticism, soda, stroke, and they are similar in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows, which we initially ordered the patient to undergo a liberating medicine in their head for three or four nights, according to what you require from the patient and their age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And afterwards you instruct the patient to shave their head with a razor, and then make them sit on a low bench and place their head on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the tip of your palm close to the pulse under the nostril between the patient's ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when you've reached the middle point as instructed, mark that location with a test, and then apply olive cautery oil which has this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place that (the olive oil) over the marked spot on the heated test, in such a way that it descends slowly as your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And slowly lift your hand and look at the spot, and if you see some quantity of the head being exposed already, like the amount of grease in oil, then lift your hand. And if your hand doesn't turn towards that iron or another one, when it is cold, show me what I have told you about this head from which you can observe.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the spot, leave that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then apply it over the burned cheek in butter and leave it until the skin from fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it was said that when the wound opens up, then the bruising improves, because it is better and more rejuvenating.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And it was said by them that the cautery is done inside the mouth, and the cautery should be kept until a part of the quality of the bone becomes hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then make this mark that gets hardened from the bone, and then treat it properly.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And it was said by others that the cautery reaches to the end, within which one should take care of the bone's strength in order for the bone to come out, and this is the method for small cautery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And consider that place where the vapor from the head escapes.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And keep the wound open for a long time, and then it should be cured when it becomes consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	And yet I have not seen these two types of head cautery from you, but rather in some individuals according to fear; leave that as is, the best is with health when possible; so the head opens through solution due to continuous contact like we've testified in other body parts, and especially if the patient's head has a hot nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cautery is better and safer, you should do it that way; from there onwards and with that method for health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About head cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When throughout the head a chronic and long-lasting pain occurs, and this is prolonged in the patient's body, using remedies such as teas, broth, cold compresses, wraps, hot water baths, massages, and other treatments, especially if already treated with one cautery which doesn't aggravate the patient's symptoms from those causes; then consider that if the head of the patient has a strong creation nature; and doesn't cause much heat or inflammation, then this cautery should be replaced by another, leaving the patient with just a few sessions.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply the cautery near his forehead in the spot where the neck divides, applying the cautery inside that area.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the neck and reveal the amount of matter in it which we have recounted, then apply the cautery near his head behind the neck at the place where one would call gout, - and that is the spot where suction was performed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And hold your hand in ashes, do not uncover the mouth, for this patient experiences great pain due to this different from all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I shall direct this cautery in its place, for it is known that this cautery when used to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that which is applied to the middle part of the head; and this is the form of this patient.
Capitol ters.	Head healed.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Regarding the cautery treatment for non-age-old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain at the back of the head or pain spreading within the skull, it should be relieved with medicine that clears the head, and then another treatment is administered, which I have mentioned in the treatments for diseases; and if this does not improve the situation, then the cautery treatment for this is done in two ways: either with an acute burning medicine cauterization or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Medicine cautery that involves burning is when you take a dollop of garlic, and pierce it and cut off its extremities from both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then apply the painful area in the temple with a small knife where it is cut into you leave the neck, where it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen on you by stopping it with pressure due to descending constriction, and let that flow through the space of three hours; and release it by spreading out the garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your elbow under water where the spot makes a bruise.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with grease until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see this done with some burning medicines which I have written in the detailed treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cautery with iron according to this method: heat it for the process of which here is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called a ring lock, where the head of the patient is thus shaped like a thorn, and in the middle part of it, there is a small elevation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand on the painful area, - to prevent burning the skin which is being heated -, and move the small iron slowly but steadily.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that gets burned by the uniqueness of the neck thus much, raise your hand so that the artery which is being heated does not get burned either, to prevent a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then dip your elbow in water with salt and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; and then place your elbow under water, and treat it with grease until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see this done, apply the cautery at the end of the knife as for cautering, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this non-age-old migraine.
Capitol quart.	Head fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Regarding the cautery treatment for ancient migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines as we have said for the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if this does not improve your treatment, because there is still what we previously mentioned about the first cautery with medicine or with heat, then know that you should light the knife cautery so that it becomes white. This means holding your hand over the painful area at a line which has most of what was previously discussed, or at this point; and place your hand for a moment and press that into piercing the artery and entering the skull.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which should not be burned during chewing, and that the muscle which controls it is not affected, and that no cramp occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the fear of blood flow from the artery that is cut, which causes fear, especially in those who do not know what they are doing and lack experience; leave the operation to them at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will remind you of the protocol for blood flow accidents involving the artery according to his method in this free.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not suffice for this cautery and observes the body of the patient tolerable, apply this cautery at the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see this, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the head of artery iron with two knives, and this is a better cautery treatment and more appropriate.
Capitol .v.	Head V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Regarding the cautery treatment for earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and for lack of treatment which I have mentioned in the division, and if this does not relieve the pain, then heat the cautery, and this is the one called a point, whose form here is:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And close to the anus, it is pierced near the belly button, and guided around the entire area of the abdomen like a wheel being rolled, or in the course of any time if the pain occurs at any time.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue with the application of the cautery to the edge of the belly button little by little, until you have tried placing your hand on the area and attempted.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is applied to all parts of the abdomen, and it stops there, then proceed to treat the areas inside where they are healing.
Capitol .vi.	End of Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Regarding the application of cautery.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turtura is something that can be cured and treated with cautery; it involves certain substances that cause issues due to phlegm, as we discussed earlier in the sections about illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid applying cautery to the substance that causes it through drying or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of turtura using jarrings and capi-purgatives and guar-guarisms, if you don't confirm your treatment, then it's like applying cautery to the patient three times: first by treating the belly button area, then leaving a little space for its normal heat to return, and lastly treating the connection between two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Hold your cautery for the opposite side of the affected area, as relief is only found in the part that appears to be healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of applying cautery is as follows: apply the heat to the right end of the belly button area above the chin, and on the head another, with its length according to the length of that segment, then place your hand in between while letting the fire burn through the quantity corresponding to the substance's quality of the diseased part.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is how you apply cautery, and it is a skill of the surgeon, whose method involves being in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, there's a subtle way to do this: if you use a little for each application; then understand that when it works against excessive roughness, a little is enough.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently treat the area where it's processed internally until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	End of Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Regarding the application of cautery for old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it using what we've discussed and don't confirm your treatment, and if the patient doesn't have a fever, then apply cautery in four applications: on all parts of their head; with cautery and halfway across the head, as we've said; and apply it to the chest.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method for applying cautery is done according to what was described earlier.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And once it has been treated on the mouth of the stomach; and it's mostly behind; then proceed to treat as you've processed.
Capitol .viii.	End of Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Regarding the application of cautery for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Understand that you should give these to the patient during meals as large jarrings and serviceable pills for improving digestion.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the entire head of the patient and place the chest on the plaster described in the treatise on plasters, on the left side.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause a few applications, which is the method of applying cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do this according to that method I've mentioned before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if for those means recovery is good; and otherwise, then do this to them three times on the last part of their head, which should descend from the more elevated part of the head into the less elevated area near the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each application as much as the quantity described has been applied; then proceed to treat the application of cautery accordingly.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If the addition and the patient can tolerate it, then apply cautery in the middle area; and if you find greater addition, then apply cautery over both parts of the head.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And treat it as it heals; and let the olive oil be used according to the method described previously.
Capitol .ix.	End of Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Regarding the application of cautery and the soothing treatment of all parts of the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Understand that you should process with digestion of the head using jarrings and what we've discussed; then shave the patient's head, proceed to apply cautery in the middle of the head, apply it over all parts of the head, apply it on the last part of the body, and do three applications on the cervical spine.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if necessary in the illness of soothing for many and the patient can tolerate it with strong ailment, then apply cautery four times on both cervical spines, subsequently apply it until its effect is felt throughout the body, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And treat it as it heals; this should be olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	End of Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the application of cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Cautery is not applied to epilepsy in general, only when it's due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And understand that you should digest the brain with meals at the beginning using pills and another treatment which we have described in the section when the patient is large and can tolerate the removal of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it's a child who doesn't tolerate medicines, then administer guar-guarisms and chewables for good digestion before that with several days, for the improvement of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery on that spot at the midpoint of the head according to the previous method, and use another cautery on the back of their head, and on each corner of their head he applies a cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply those cauteries as I said, while having a paralytic effect and soothing action on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive oil-based cautery as described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the treatment of melancholy with cautery.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and weakened by humidity, then apply those cauteries as we have said in the area causing paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is overabundance descending to melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then make them drink that which purifies the brain according to what was explained in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient's head, and apply decent turtoge to them around the circle, and then remove that at the midpoint of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is sixty years old, and he needs treatment from every part.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply liniment; it is fitting to use an old sheep's grease for this purpose.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire until the heat is measured, which they say causes discomfort when it grows in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply that at the midpoint of his head in the circle, and let him stay inside until it cools down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week for a whole week, and let him follow his usual diet until he is cured; or if you want, apply this by making small punctures according to his preference, otherwise hold your hand with a cautery in such an order: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that cooked butter or grease from fat.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the treatment of water descending in the throat with cautery.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is reported to you that the water has started descending in the throat according to the signs I have explained in the division, then start and make the patient drink what purifies his head, and keep him away from all kinds of humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that sugar be dissolved in water for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to scratch his head, and apply a cautery on it on the midpoint of the head; and apply two cauteries on both temples if the water is starting to descend in both throats or one temple if the water is descending in one throat.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Let the cautery touch all veins and arteries that leave the head; and place the cauteries in that length around the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And protect yourself from any discharge when it's being treated with cautery; and if you see any blood discharges from him, give him some medicine which is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with knowledge about the extraction of arteries and the removal of those, as well as caution against blood discharges.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some times it is treated with cautery at the neck between two bones, using two well placed cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the throat are frequent and through veins and arteries located in the front of the head area is confirmed that it is overabundance causing phlegm formation, then apply a cautery with the one we have recounted in the chapter on water starting to descend into the throat, and apply a cautery at the midpoint of the head, two cauteries at the neck between the temples, and two cauteries at the neck between the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you suffer from excess, then apply a cautery across the entire length of the throat on the tip of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the treatment of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating the patient as we have instructed in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and make the patient drink the decoctions for three nights; and then shave his head, and apply a mid-level cautery with an olive oil-based cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply the treatment with a thorn-shaped cautery, and place two small cauteries on each eyebrow leaving some hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to ignite that artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the thorn-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the treatment with cautery for soothing the throat eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the throat is softened by illness or moisture, then apply this lunar-shaped cautery to that eyelid. Here is how it should be done:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, apply that treatment over both eyebrows with a small cautery on the entire area, and let them extend as far as the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And determine the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to how the fleshy part of the eyelid gets heated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the use of cautery on the eyelid when the skin turns into parts inside and on the hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eyelid turns into parts inside, when I prick the eyelid, in this case there are two ways to use cautery, which is either to apply heat or to use a medicinal burning method.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use a hot cautery, command the patient in front of it to let their skin grow as if those who undergo circumcision do, until they are extended and equalized; and if you have to pinch that area, then strengthen their eyelids so that they don't become damaged while their skins are being born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient in your position, and over the eyelid of their eyes apply a test, with a sign according to the shape of a leaf of marigold, and make the start of the sign close to the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place an embossed cut in the albumen of an egg or in pus from milk on the eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply heat to the cautery which is the form of this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And apply cautery to the figure which was marked, little by little, in small patches, while burning the surface of the skin that is as if it were a leaf of marigold, all seemingly the same.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the skin of it lifted from the puncture of the eyelid.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And lift your hand and leave it for three days, then place the cut on the border in such a way that the scab becomes elevated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if any cause returns through the skin near their birthplace and the eyelid becomes softened, then do another treatment with cautery on that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is in the eyelid remaining, then apply cautery to that area until it rises to its natural place and becomes equal, so that the skin does not hurt the eyelid.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And with the medicinal burning cautery, this means that you command the patient to let their skin grow until they are extended and equalized, then apply a pattern made of fabric in the shape of a leaf of marigold.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some known soap and a live ash. I., o let it sit this way, then mix those ashes with water and let it boil in such a way that it does not cool down; then spread the mixture on the fabric made like a leaf of marigold shape, place it over one eyelid or both; spread a cut in the albumen of an egg over this, and have the head of the patient in your position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the described over the medicine and press it a little but do not damage it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which bite is like that when it's hot.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the hot bite is endured, then wash the medicine and remove it from your position; when the bite stops, then wash the medicine with water over the eyelid; and then observe if the eyelid has been lifted as if it was washed by water. If no return occurs to that place of the medicine on the spot where the medicine did not reach, and does not damage until your operation is equalized and the eyelid is contracted again.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And place the cut on the border so that the crust of the adjustment is eradicated, and then take care of it with final ointment or another until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And for this, you must observe with diligence during the night that medicine does not fall from under your eyelid, and if the eyelid becomes softened over several days and any skin cause pinches in the eyelid, then apply your medicine to that place where the eyelid is softened again, in the same manner as at the beginning, and take care of it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a leaf of marigold.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that men's eyelids are differentiated according to their size and smallness, so this is how you should contract them.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the way of straightness towards that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the treatment of a fistula that occurs in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we have discussed in the divisions of maladies and do not apply your treatment, then you should proceed to cauterize it like this: command the patient to place their head in your position, and have one of their attendants' heads between your own hands in such a way that they are neither damaged nor agitated by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place the cut on the surface of an egg white or in pus from milk over the eyelid of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And using the heat of the cautery of which this is the method:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be heated, just like a cane or reed pen form, from one end where the cautery is applied.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it penetrates into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to remove it, do so like squeezing out.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is heated is better for this work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it has been opened, and heal and dry out what belongs to him.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open that one and remove the pus from him.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place over him the heated cautery which should be well ignited, and hold your hand with your own one a little closer to the fire at the tip of the nose, so that your hand does not move and the patient is not disturbed. Then pause the cautery on the edge of the nose and clean that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if during the beginning of your cautery it enters into the nose, that's good; and otherwise, then you should repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave him like that for three days, and then place over that point on his forehead with some oil, within which there is a dried ointment to heal.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if it has been more than ten days and is not healed, then place over him the corrosive quick medicine into which the nose is exposed and shave according to what suits in his skull.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method for cautery of a fistula which some earlier authors said: look at the location of the fistula and make an incision there and place over that fracture a thin layer, whose form is like this: Then put in that area the quantity of one inch of melted lead; hold your hand well in place without harming the patient so that the melted lead does not go into his nose; cover where you pause on the nose tip with something soft like egg white or water, let the lead settle on the location of the fistula and heal it by a marvellous cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and healing, that's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to administer medicine from the nose and reduce the fistula into the nose according to where it naturally belongs.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On cautery of the wound in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Redness occurs causing cracks on the lips, and more so on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And as you treat those cracks with what we have told you in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then heat the small cautery knife according to this method which suits:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its shape follow the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that initially in those cracks where the cautery penetrates into the root of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the throat or on the palate or in the cavities of the teeth there is pus and you make a cut, and then it bursts, ages, cleans out that part and creates a fistula, then when treating that without deepening the treatment, heat the cautery according to the amount received inside the fistula, place that heated into the source of the fistula, hold your hand where it reaches the heated iron to the root of it, do this once or twice at its end; and treat that with what we have told you about healing until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing is removed and it heals, that's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to uncover the place and expose the corrupted bones according to what comes in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cautery of teeth and soothing of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are tender, treating those with medicines instead of waiting is necessary. So place the head of the patient in his own position, then heat the cautery according to this method, making sure you pause the small part over the tooth so that the heated point quickly reaches the root of the tooth without harming it from the inside.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery for as many times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then let the patient drink water mixed with salt and keep that for an hour. Then wash that out, as when the tooth pain is reduced and the gum inflammation is alleviated and the moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of dental pain through cautery.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When dental pain is due to coldness or worm, or if you do not respond to medical treatment, then treat it with cautery in two ways: either apply a point on the gum of teeth, or use direct fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery on the gum involves taking cow's horns and heating them in a forge. Then take hold of it and cover it at the tip of the tooth, then immerse that into heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth as soon as possible until it is heated up.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then apply that several times while allowing the heat of the fire to reach the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see that, immerse wool or cotton in the heated horn above it, then place that on the painful tooth and place a glowing iron over it while letting the heat of the iron reach the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cautery with fire should be done when the ember or iron is at its hottest point, and there's a roughness inside it, and the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form that it will take, place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery is heated up; and do this several times while reducing or completely alleviating the pain either on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And so, because of this cautery that the patient fills their mouth with good horn and hold it for an hour, then they should swallow it; this is how the cautery works.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And treat with what you see as necessary according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is how the cannula is done:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of hernias through cautery.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by phlegm and fluids that do not yield to digestion with medicines, and you notice a slight improvement in digestion, then ignite the cautery according to this method: hold it at both ends so that the steam can be used to apply heat from one end to the other. Place the burning tip on the hernia once or if necessary again while allowing it to reach the root of the hernia cavity.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia is small, then hold the cautery according to the size of the hernia, and leave it for three days while applying an ointment made from fat in a horn until whatever the fire has burned out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with grease, cloths, and bandages until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The method for the cannula or the cautery treatment is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the treatment of coughing and constriction in the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture enters the pulmonary canal, especially if it is due to coldness in the stomach, then note that the patient should be made to expel this at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then treat by applying cautery to the bottom of the throat where it has become swollen.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And make sure that the cautery does not reach the throat and do not burn too much of their body, only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply cautery there with another type of cautery to the junction of the neck with the lower part of their spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And treat the elbow joint in the same way as previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with what was mentioned before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the treatment of lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moisture, the patient does not have a fever or scabs, this is ancient lung disease. Then apply two cauterizations on the sternum at the swollen parts of the neck and the chest; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and treat the elbow joint as previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cautery application for the punctation is with the type of cautery called punctum, as explained in the section on puncturing ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points inside each of them; and then treat that with what was mentioned beforehand until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And already, you have three levels for this cautery treatment at that point: in one application, you can perform three cauterizations according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the treatment of a bump at the tip of the penis.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the penis is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return in time, you must correct its dislocation before it returns to its usual state. Then move it slightly so that it becomes straight as we have demonstrated. In this case, first reduce the dislocation, then have the patient lie on their back or their stomach; and lift the body part which is inside the bump at the top of the penis when you place your left hand's fingers on its parts with your fingers facing upwards. If the dislocation is inside, follow these instructions.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you should heat the cautery with two points; this is how it works:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And you should heat the cautery in such a way that it enters from one side, and then from the other side; and the figure of the cauteryization will come as if with two cauterized points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that subtle one according to the amount of heat; and this is how it works:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some cases are adjusted according to this account, and these are the cauteries .viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And place your hand on the cautery in such a way that there is salt residue, and then have the patient lie prone, and make sure the body does not get burnt for some time until it feels comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and towards the back, do this: then apply a cautery on the muscle under the cauterized point or on the bone's points, until the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced in the patient's body, thus healing them.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the treatment of gastric cautery.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and wet humors accumulate in the stomach, causing a protrusion of its components and their multiplication within it, if you continue with the methods of treatment and they do not work, then it is observed that the patient lies on his right side, extends his hands and things, and applies a cautery there three times: in one cauterization place the foot as wide as the palm of your hand under a cauterized bone point, and in two cauterizations place each of the two sides of the cauterization between them until you get the figure of triangular cautery; and stretch out those that are not properly adjusted causing pus to form.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is as much as the two fleshy parts of the thickness of the intestine.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery is according to this form, and if you wish, apply a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery according to the circular form according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized punctually at that which is frightened by this cautery: and you place your hand on the stomach point according to the heat you want with the heat, then apply a cautery to it; then treat that with treatment that proceeds until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the treatment of colic by cautery.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the stomach due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind causing excess from its normal composition, and the patient does not improve with what we have said and it doesn't work, then observe that the patient lies on his back, holds heat three times according to this form over the stomach under the ribs, and you can continue until you feel comfortable in the lying position for a person.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the size of the finger, and make the cauteries along the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And don't touch your hand on the bone under the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of heat that sticks is equal to the size of the thickness of the intestine wall, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if not standing, then lie down, which already has spread their things, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to apply these cauteries with knife-like cautery tools when you have skill and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo the cautery process, and ensure that the heat sticks to the entire intestine so it sticks throughout the body and reaches all organs, as this is due to the subtle nature of the intestine; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On perforating stomach abscess with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or an abscess in the stomach, and you want to know if that abscess is within the flesh of the stomach or around it, then if it's within the flesh of the stomach, the patient will experience increased gravity and pain intensity.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it's around the stomach lining, then the pain is intense and often tires the doctors in treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then observe that the patient should be lying on their back; and then place your hand over the location of the abscess with heat; and then heat up the cautery which is similar to a needle, as its form was described in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply the cautery there and within it until the entire intestine is heated up, until it reaches the chest, until you feel it heal.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this method of cautery but rather the one that is prolonged as studied in the art of medicine, and with the most maladies associated with it; however, there have been some cases where heat has been applied to this operation, however, you should follow that advice, and it's better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the treatment of swellings with cautery.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient methods for applying cautery to swellings were done in this manner and you should follow this from the texts of Aristology. Take a long pointed reed found among the aristology texts that is as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and heat it over a fire, and apply a cautery at the place which is between the continuation of the shoulder blade up to the chest; and with two cauterizations leave it directed, one slightly inclined towards the part below the chin, and with two cauterizations in this area that is declining between the fifth rib and the spine, leaving one inclined to the parts behind; and another cautery at the midpoint of the feet; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at the parts behind; and a cautery at the place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on each side of the feet, leaving the cauterization that is in between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not remove your hand from the area of the cautery, but rather in the process of its application.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it is said by some old men who are among the people that use to apply iron-like cauterization with fire in this area which is between the ribs, up until we reach this place and heal it there as we have mentioned for this place of the wound.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	There should be no fear in this perforation with the cautery; it is just like what happened to you recently when you injured yourself at the site of the fistula where healing did not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the application of the cautery to meat.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of meat as we have discussed in its division and do not apply your treatment, then using a cautery on it occurs according to three ways, all of which are perpendicular. One way is to make three or four lines in a row along the length of the meat according to the shape of the cauterizations in the wound, which I have already described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cauterization leave the thickness of a finger or even less, and the way to apply the cautery is the same as we have described in the cautering of wounds.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not remove your hand from the area of the cautery; and let the patient rest on their elbows.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to apply cautery; that means you ignite the cautery with two streams of fire, a fact we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of muscle. And raise the patient's body from behind so as not to let the discharge of the left thigh reach the area where the meat was wounded.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be at which you raise the body according to the length of the torso, so that the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both streams in the middle, ignite them, in that place where they penetrate from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see fit, apply the cautery with three streams of fire.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the effects of the cautery which has allowed blood to flow for too many days; this is preferable compared to other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the application of the cautery to dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be applied to dropsy but only in places appropriately.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy as we have described in its division and do not apply your treatment, then you should use the following method: cauterize with four cauterizations around the belly button, one on the stomach, another on the wound, another between the two kidneys, two cauterizations on either side of the backbone, one on the right side of the leg, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be as wide as the thickness of the body part being treated.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the application open for a long time until blood flows out properly.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the patient from treatment near the cautery as it causes confusion and hinders the healing process. It should be treated with rest and aid for recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery which is applied to the abdomen should be elongated as per its previous form, and the area where the cautery is applied on the back should be like an olive according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the application of cautery to the legs and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the legs are swollen with watery dropsy and filled with salty water, you should apply cautery to the back of the feet up to the area between the thumb and little finger. Lift your hand next to the cauterization and do not twist it; then lift your hand and do not return it completely as the salty water will drain out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The application of the cautery is as follows: Apply two cauterizations on each thigh, and in every part place a cauterization at the tip of the knife-like extension.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the application of the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: hold one end and the other is in the middle of the thigh; on each thigh, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the open wound for a long time as part of treatment so that some water drains out from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the application of cautery to the abdominal region.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is due to wind and moisture inside causing digestive and retaining processes, they are within the stomach and in the intestines. This condition can be treated using standard therapeutic methods without causing harm; often, patients endure the exhibition of the disease's symptoms by undergoing a stomach cautery procedure. In this case, it is necessary to perform a large stomach cautery according to the sequence established during the gastric cautery process, followed by a circular cautery and four cauterizations in the area below the umbilicus, including subtle pin-point cauterization; and a large cautery over the navel region, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you encounter excessively abundant moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then perform a cautery on the groin area and over the intestines, reinforcing your adjustments with two cauterizations on the stomach and close to the inguinal region. This is a complete cure of youth that will not fail.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capítulo XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When dealing with ancient hemorrhoids of a large humor or corrupted moisture, if they are treated as we have said in the division and you do not cause harm to your treatment, then perform three cauterizations on each of the two small and triangular buttocks' pus points. Also, conduct one cauterization above the navel groove for two times.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you feel that the stomach of the patient is cold and the food they eat isn't digested well, plus if their face appears pale, then perform a large stomach cautery according to how it was done before; also do one on the tongue and another on the chest. Use a subtle pin-point cauterization for these procedures. Allow some time after each treatment for healing, and soon after this process, they should recover.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capítulo XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cautery of the liver near the appendix.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the liver, then you apply the cautery that is akin to fire.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place the heated tool into that liver incision, and as you perform your work, ensure the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the disease spreads.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice; if the liver is too big, then cauterize each of them according to what we've discussed earlier. Also, cure those with treatments you administer until they recover.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you apply a large cautery to the liver, it will heal better during youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capítulo XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the treatment of fistulas that naturally occur in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not conform to the treatment we've recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by this, they should be treated with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when a certain one has a fistula in nature and it's ancient, full of sickly fluids, and contaminated pus, then that which is the essence worth discharging from it should be extracted with gentle probing. And you ought to understand the depth of its extent while conducting this probing process.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Place the cautery that resembles fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place the ignited cautery in this fistula, according to the depth of the probing.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly inside until those corrupted bodies are consumed; do this one time or two times, or three times according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And protect yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula reaches to the bladder's blood vessel or intestines, then protect all those areas. Do not perform this operation until you're sure that the fistula is in a fatty area and there's no possibility of it penetrating further.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And treat the affected area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area has healed, and all substances have been removed from it, and they continue to do so for a long time, then you will know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the substances are not his own, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of his organs, or that there lies a reason for this condition in those causes whose memory will return to him at that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Regarding the cautery of the ears.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the ears there is pain due to scratching or through great windiness, and when the patient's ear is reddened, then one should consider cautery of that on the ears with a cautery over each ear with a pointy tool whose handle helps remember the procedure.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And for the second one, slightly apply the cautery, so that three linear cauteries come forth, and therefore they will be more at the back in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Regarding the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When it happens in the bladder due to scratching and wetness causing urine retention, if the patient cannot urinate, then apply cautery at that sensitive spot over the bladder, like starting points of the skin on the penis, and do so with a single cautery tool at that sensitive spot on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery according to the size of the feet' nails; apply cautery with a tool at that sensitive spot on the lower part of both sides, or use two tools if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And apply pointy cauteries according to how they are performed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Regarding the cautery of the throat.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is scratching and wetness in the throat, causing it to be difficult to swallow, and menstrual periods are disturbed for this reason, delayed or not occurring at all, and pain arises in the throat, one should consider that this area needs three cauteries around the navel, as we have described earlier when treating the bladder; and also apply a pointy cautery tool over that sensitive spot on both sides of the body, either using two tools if necessary.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Regarding the cautery treatment for a dislocated shoulder.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When wetness causes the muscles to infiltrate the shoulder joint area and creates instability in its location, a sign that this occurs is when one arm extends beyond the other when compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is compressed within the armpit region.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then consider applying cautery to the patient's shoulder area as if drawing a circle similar, once you have marked it out around this circumference in the shoulder region just like it is rotated, and for that reason, when the shoulder rotates, the center of the circle will be the right spot.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And follow the same form for applying cautery as described in the treatment of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this kind of cautery is not at your disposal, then apply three large olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply the cautery according to the intensity of pain in all parts of the body; and then proceed with caring for that area until it has healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Regarding the treatment of sciatic vein cautery.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the shoulder area, caused by scratching and wetness for this patient, the treatment we have mentioned is applied to the patient without delay, and then it gets cured. So consider that you will let out the body fluids through pills made of honey or artificial pills or similar; and then apply cautery to the area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of applying cautery in this case follows two methods: one is using cautery with burning medicines, or the other is applying cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two scientifically recognized methods, of which one is to apply three triangular-shaped cauteries over that area on the shoulder width of the patient as described, and ensure they have good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the distance between each cautery is equivalent to the thickness of your finger, and apply either an olive-sized or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	May some improvements be made on the mid part at the head of the shoulder blade so that there are four cauteries in total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, apply cautery as described in the treatment of a shoulder dislocation using this circular method, which encompasses and burns away pain throughout the entire body.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of applying cautery in the form of heat when pain is localized to the shoulder and does not extend within the chest.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it does extend within the chest, then apply two cauteries on the breast over the area where the pain is concentrated; and one cautery at the ribcage slightly to the right of four finger-widths.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it's a surgical knife cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of pain in the body.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain is centered within the area between your feet and hands, then apply cautery here at this location, using a point for three points or four or more if it's necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain is localized in front of your chest area, then apply a surgical knife cautery here.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And always remember that when applying cautery, you should not continue until the process burns nerves or large vessels, for this can result in damage to the body or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen both of those who apply cautery on the ribcage and finalize during the process, then fire inflation within where the tumor has obtained the foot, and fire perforates and decays throughout the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And it happens that there's an intense stomach solution, and at that moment death occurs.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And some wise people say in the cauterization of water cautery, this is how it should be done: make it resemble a circular iron piece where the circumference is about the size of a hand; and make its opening according to the thickness of a finger bone or perhaps slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle place another metal piece; and make the space which is between them equal to the length of a toe; and those circles should be opened in two parts each; and the length of those rods is one toe or two toes, and make the iron grooves suitably aligned within the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And it should be ignited in the fire until it heats up and sends sparks, and then it should be placed on the water part, with the patient standing upright.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that area with three round water cauteries.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let that area rest for three days; then, cover that spot with bandages and let the opened wound heal properly for many days; and treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: or, children, of this type of cautery we have used few for the sake of examining them, and for this reason we have found those that watch over them.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Consolation to those who suffer from large cauteries, and finds the place of pain for them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Consolation for the cautery with medicines attached is that you make two circular holes in each, through which the steam of iron water escapes; and the length of the part on the patient should be about two or perhaps three times this size.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each part has the amount of thickness of the iron rod; and place them under and above each other, and make sure they contain one within another according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place the patient's foot in the water part with them standing upright, and press your hand on the water part; then take hot water and pour it between the two circles, making sure its quality is with a small fire, and let that be for an amount of one hour, and make the patient endure the biting sensation - as if they were being bitten by fire - until the biting sensation ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand to the instrument and wipe off the hot water from all of the water with lukewarm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let that area rest for three days and place a poultice over it where the color of the healing is intensified, and let this be done for several days, then the body will run off from the patient; this comes at the end in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or chest, make the patient stand in a position containing water as is done for water cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of iron water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and ash not completely extinguished in equal parts one-third each, mix them with a new wave where the part left is pierced through a small rod, according to the amount that fits into your fire.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of this wave another wave in such a way that it sends water over the live alkali and ash with lukewarm water which catches them as wide as your finger, and when you squeeze these between your hand for good pressure, let the steam that comes out from the sharp water of the part left to the new wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over live ash and new alkali, where this will have strong acidity from the moment on, which is administered in operations of medicine and in cauterization of other limbs, this operation being done with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines among which there is a large cauterization, as with thyme vinegar and honey and ash in water that should be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And as for the treatment of a man from antiquity in terms of surgery and healing, which is used to heal pain caused by water and sciatic vein, this method is very effective, and it doesn't require any other kind of treatment, and once healed in one go as described, it makes him feel light on his feet and already feels better in that way.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be taken close to a minty vert, and if there's no vert available, take a recent fig; then mix it with a little water and place it in the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and let it rest.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for a duration of three hours or until the patient feels relief from the pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then immerse that in water until the patient's body turns red, and then place it in the sun, where the pain will cease and healing will take place.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that one should not use these medicines with cauterization unless it's for the purification of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Consolation from Escorides states that when there's an injury to the vein, it is cauterized; and this is how you perform the cauterization: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the feet and below the knees.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a goat's skin, make it bleed in the fire where it has been burned with charcoal; and place him over the wool, let it stretch while it is being heated.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And continue this process, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of gnawing enters the water and rests on the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cattle's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the treatment for pain in two stages using cautery.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in two places are caused by several reasons, such as impact or striking or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to those, due to the infusion of moist and irritating matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not like any other; it is made in this single kind which is produced by the discharge of irritant matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then remove the waste from the thigh with fitted pills and make them similar to these, which are made over both sides where there is pain, three lines according to the width of each one; try with tests in each line up to cauterizations or more, depending on the amount that can be tolerated by the patient and its effectiveness.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And this is done with cattle's cautery using a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, you can cauterize with three or four cattle's cauteries according to this method:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the treatment for glibesity using cautery.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Some symptoms associated with this disease in young children; and the sign of its commencement in children is that it affects their skin and causes elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it appears behind the lower part of the back and on the buttocks where it already begins to rise above the other vertebral bones.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you do this and want to stop it, then cauterize that with cattle's cautery according to this method:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	let the cautery touch all parts of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize along the circumference of the spine with two or three lines of cattle's cautery.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Make the points close together among themselves.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then treat the area until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Remember that cautery should not be administered in glibesity which is caused by muscle spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the treatment for gout and joint pain using cautery.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that permeate every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And how gout caused by cold humors is treated using the method of treatment and not letting the pain recur, then the pains are subjected to cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And this is that you cauterize there, regarding evacuation in the circumference of the joint on the thigh with small cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how it should be for an olive-shaped cautery, which is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains spread into the hollows or to other joints, and these symptoms appear, then you should cauterize that above each hollow with three or four cattle's cauteries in total around this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if these cauteries are what you need, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand before the cautery only around the circumference of the lesion.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains enter into both hollows and feet, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the chest and it is called gout, then puncture along the ribs as they move, puncture on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the rib circumference on each wrist and on the thumb of your hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains spread for several days to the elbows or muscles, then cauterize all of those around each helper.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the waste from proper regulation and reception of medicines; if proper regulation and heating are done with this cautery, then healing will occur, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the treatment for ruptures using cautery.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is rupture in the arteries and saying that the intestines are hanging in front of the belly, and this is how they start doing it, then you should advise the patient to leave his food for the day and use gentle means so that the abdominal opening will close down.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then guide the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to have his chest so that it may be healed or that you see the belly opening or intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to your fingers and test the rupture over the bones of the foot with the indication being similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery, which is its form like this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand near the tip of the cautery, and you go inside where you find the veins in the middle of the body; and try again with this position if you have not succeeded in the first attempt to reach the blood vessels.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the condition of the intestine during your cautery procedure, making sure not to burn that section of the intestine as it may cause death or other serious harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you use the cautery near the blood vessels, do not touch them; otherwise, your operation will not succeed.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And understand that the application of the cautery for children should be delicate according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the site of the cautery for three days with salves until the scab from the burn heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should rest on their back for 10 days until the site and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you should adjust the patient's diet according to the duration of their healing period; make sure not to force the intestine out during their recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to remove after approximately 10 days, then administer medicine properly; keep the patient for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them rest from work and enjoy full meals and drink, as well as vigorous activities; when they use this complete regimen of treatment, they will indeed recover.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will tell you about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, especially at mealtime, where you should not drink excessively. In this case, cauterize that rupture on the rounded part of the cautery according to his size, as what is drained from the fever would be like the remainder of him; and then treat that with what we have said, and do not adjust it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already tell some first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with temptation:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and draw a line that extends beyond the width at the waist for the left side of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand on a triangular cautery, more so the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the treatment of twisting (of the intestine).
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in any limb due to injury or impact that continues for a long time and fails to respond to medication treatment, then know you should treat it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And for the cautery of any member according to its size and proportion, its vitality and development, location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; and otherwise, then apply the cautery again. Given the custom of these pains, they often puncture the limbs near that limb which is closest to them, so know you should treat those with a pointed cautery while ensuring the patient heals completely.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the treatment of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lesions are treated with a large amount of cautery, especially when it results from the decay of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize it, assess whether the leprosy is contagious and treat with what we have said in the division of treatment without delay or hesitation. If you're hesitant about harming the patient, fear that corruption could spread throughout their entire body and cause damage, then cauterize on the head with several cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another at the back near where the hair ends; treat both on two corns; and one behind, on the base of the neck or spine.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with the cautery for a little while until it starts to form a small suction in the blood vessels, ensuring that any past dislocations are corrected so that the expiration of large vapors is alleviated; cauterize on the mucus according to what is needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread to the patient's body and is clearly manifest, then know that you should cauterize it with those cauteries we have said for the head; apply a cautery on the tip of the nose, two on each eye socket, two on each collar bone, five on the ribs, one large over the hip joints close to the anus, one on the neck, two on each knee, one on each ankle, and another on each heel, on all the muscles, and on both sides of his feet; cauterize it over all the joints mentioned along with arms and legs, and on each of his heels.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And protect yourself from the nerves which are on the foot so as not to harm those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some inflammations are treated with a cautery on the bones of the heel and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the intestines.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more accurately you apply cauteries, the faster and better they heal; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery like in the gums, as long as their body is numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the size of cauteries should vary according to the body parts and joints as determined by the special tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat the cautery with powdered turtle shell mixed with honey and another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the application of cauteries for numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is numbed or asleep and treated with medicines, plasters, and yet does not heal, then you apply cauteries to that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its diminutive.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate only a little into the severity of the condition.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat it with ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some inflammations are treated with a cautery on any numbness which affects the rest and the feet, as well as the spinal columns of both, stimulating the nerves that belong to that limb, thus enhancing the numbness.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Only consider this if someone is knowledgeable about the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body's moving parts.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the application of cautery to those that are disfigured.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When scars are old and do not improve with some of the ointments of medicine, then you apply cautery to that with a mild cautery according to the quantity of severity of the condition inside. In this way, the whiteness and color of it are enhanced, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat it with turtleshell and lentils mixed with rubbed oil and the leaves of arnica, or with gander's dung or guinea hen dung, each part from one of them, all are mixed together. And then cover a cloth and place it over the area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the application of cautery to warts.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When warts start appearing and you want them to stop growing, then apply a circular cautery around it as it is rolled.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be treated with an inner cautery in the middle location; however, I do not see this, fearing that it might become infected, as I have seen some inflammations.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And the pus is inner that should be treated with a circular cautery around it as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the application of cautery to tumors.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some tumors take time to mature, and this is due to an excess causing that, or because of the patient's age in decline, having few symptoms, or due to time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then apply multiple small-pointed cauteries around it. And afterwards leave that which will facilitate its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want the perforation of it with cautery, then ignite that which is the shape of it: and leave it in the middle location of the tumor until the condition penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that place which left pus, because the arm's body is relieved; then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the application of cautery to ulcers.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Ulceration is a spreading corruption in the limb, which eats away at it as wood burns when a live twig is set on fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you see that ulcer in the place that undergoes cautery by fire, then ignite small and large pointed tumorous cauteries as appropriate for the place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And after that, treat it from every part until you eradicate all the corrosion without harming any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And after that, leave that for three days, and place over the areas treated with oil mixed until all the scabs have been eradicated and all corrosion is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And after that, treat it with meat-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if within three days the healthy meat grows in that which is not corrupted, it's good; but otherwise, then you should reapply the cautery to those that are destroyed in the affected areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with some days using a sharp medicine, which is half in the location of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, applying cautery by fire is for minor ulcers that heal quickly.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you find it necessary for its use.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the application of cautery to nodules and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Inflammations that affect the parts of the malaise body which are called clau, and it is a large cause, inserted deep inside causing pain in the chest; applying cautery to those is done in two ways: by fire cautery and by heated water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Light the cautery with fire and heat up the point of the cautery like a needle, which is made of iron according to its capacity to contain the entire part, and it should have thin grooves.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that heat on the tip, and then rotate your hand around the cautery within the groove of the tip, so the heat reaches to the depth of the tip.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it for three days until blisters start forming.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then cover that with salvedge leaves impregnated in salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, until that rash is eradicated.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then cure the area with meat grease ointment until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if they are not converted, and spots that heal occur on the surface of the body, especially on the chest and feet, then you should apply with hot cauteries in water. Take a piece of iron or a needle point, place it over the spot; add some water to the container, take a small amount of boiling water, hold your hand, rotate it slightly with your fingers, press the edge of the container on the rash of the spot, and allow the boiling water to penetrate through the center of the boil; let the patient endure the bite of the hot water for an hour, then remove it. As soon as the spot heals, that is eradicated from the body.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this with those and another one next to each other, until you cover all of them in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then treat those abscesses that are eradicated from the body by using the ointments that cause meat to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapitre 53.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cautery of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to friction on the nerves or through fever caused by friction, or through another similar cause, you should apply a series of four or five cauteries or around the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra having one cautery; and on the feet, you have a single cautery, and over the stomach, you have an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the patient's tremors subside as their health improves with friction massage.
Capitol .lv.	Chapitre 54.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cautery of accidental damage to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are ruptures in the body, and pus-filled channels that are made of corrupted thick matter; thus, at the beginning when they appear, it should be treated by applying cautery over all parts of the fistula with a thin, sharp stick that is heated like fire; or with long rods of lithology; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some blisters are cauterized during the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not hardened, and they break up excesses, doing so on those, and it heals them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, you should ensure that this is accompanied by the evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapitre 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cautery for inflammation due to the cut of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When there is inflammation from the cut of an artery that should bleed out, or if you need to make cuts for abscesses or on body parts, then do so carefully, and it becomes difficult to stop that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And when this happens with another one, then you wrap your fingers around the opening of the artery, and place them on that spot where you have just applied strength to those blisters, so that it stops the flow of blood left there, without causing it to come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place the olive-shaped hot cauteries for few and large ones, in number many, and blow on those until there are flames.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large depending on the location and wound where the artery has ruptured, over that vein blowing vigorously as soon as you have stopped your action, and apply the cautery so that it is reduced and confined to that blood flow.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you stop your action and remove the cautery, then take another one from among those heated cauteries prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease doing this one after another until the blood flow is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that brings other harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict this flow in these cases, especially if the artery is large, unless with one of four methods: or you use a cautery as we mentioned, or extraction when it's not extracted, which happens when it's extracted and its extremities are burned leading to restricted blood flow; or they're treated by oil or paste due to their stiffness or tightness, or they are laid with medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood flow; and they are strengthened with powder during proper restriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Use what helps to properly restrict the patient with paste and stiffness by means of burning causes or similar methods, do not use anything else but the correct method.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this needs to be done with something else and the doctor or medicine is not present, then apply the method we have described on that vein opening as we mentioned, and understand making great restriction within the wound so that the blood flow stops from most parts of the wound, and over the artery do not allow it to bleed; and make sure that you sprinkle water rubbed with large coldness over it until the blood coagulates and thickens; and then decide based on what is necessary for cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Start the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	From incisions, puncturing, suction, phlebotomy, plagues and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have discussed in the first chapter all the illness related to the application of a burning cautery and certain medicinal remedies, along with the opportunities and causes thereof, and the instruments necessary for those applications; I have organized the chapters concerning the anatomy of the head up to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	I will proceed in this chapter with that specific treatment, so as to alleviate the suffering of whoever has requested it, regarding what they have demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, listen carefully, son, because in this chapter we will delve into what is done in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for you to be cautious, remember that in this operation which is part of this chapter, various evacuations are performed such as the application of salt in the place where life can be endangered by pouring over the vein or making an incision on the abscess or area of pus removal or purging of the plague or extraction of a splinter or making a cut for the skin and their appearances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear, trembling, and in their worst case scenario, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in the case of illness, some practices must be followed regarding diseases as they are for men.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them is one who will suffer from his illness and it's only mild death awaits him, also due to the intensity of what he finds in his illness, and because of the prolonged illness, there is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is the one who gives you this advice and tells you to hope for their health, and their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to someone who approaches you like this one; your caution should be greater than desire and your greediness; and do not presume any cause over this without a certain science that verifies what you must know, which brings sensible consequences.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your illnesses with prediction and indication towards which health is transformed, where in that it is an aid for you regarding acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God inspires His wisdom in you and does not withhold direction and protection from you, which is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter in sections according to chapters following the one on cauterization, for dealing with illnesses from the head down to the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you request and what you need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness mostly affects children, and when the baby's strength reaches the child's head, it will subside.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some cases are due to a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have only seen this illness in children; and for all of them that I have seen, death comes, which is why it seems to me like an abandoned work among those.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen a child with the head full of water, and his head was always so magnificently large that it could not contain itself due to the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased within which fire would result in death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the bone and the skull, or accumulates outside on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	And in that case if the moisture is between the bone and the skull and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision at the mid-point of the head along a fissure across its width, and let the length of the fissure be two fingers deep where the moisture flows. This is the shape of the spout:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions as follows:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is outside of the skull, the sign of it is that you open the head's seams from all directions and water squirts out when you press that with your hand on those inner parts, not this that you hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if you make incisions in the middle of the head along three fissures as follows:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	Then extract all the moisture; strengthen the incisions with bandages and padding; cover that above with vinegar and oil on the fifth day, then stretch the muscles and cure the wound with salves and ointments, strengthen the head with equality; eat the illness with dry meat of little humidity so that the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method for making an incision that takes into account the size of the abscess and collection of water, where some cases are more in the back of the head or on the front part or on the right or left; therefore, pay attention to the location of the abscess and accumulation of water, and do this as best suits you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that don't cut the artery and let flows of salt and dry up illness through that flow of salt for evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision into arteries which are near the ears, they are called hemorrhaging cuts.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When sickness or pain occurs in the mouth or in the body and if it is long-lasting, and does not benefit from the treatment of medicines, then this is the main treatment for these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And indeed when you wish to cut into those that the patient directs as their head, and properly rubs the place with a hard cloth so that the arteries appear, and properly strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and properly consider where the pulse is; and the places above the places which are close to the ears are depressed, and they do not necessarily appear in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And properly press onto the artery as if trying to pierce it, and properly cut into each from the tip of each sharp part until you enter the mouth, and do this according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the needle into the artery and twist it where they intersect with the parts above them.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And make the length of the cut two digits in proportion, so that when any vein is cut, the beat is interrupted at its exit, which jumps back and forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear upon probing, then measure from the ear the quantity of space three digits, and properly press as if trying to pierce it, and enter into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And whatever that removes from the pulse is a quantity of blood one part. And strengthen the flow if it is more or less blood than that, and all of this depends on the quantity that appears from the vitality of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And properly consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of pus, then cut that so as not to produce a boil.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And properly strengthen the wound with plasters and with strips of cloth bandage, and properly treat that with grease until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Third chapter.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Regarding the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old headache or intense pain occurs in the temples due to moisture and quality in those pains, or a hot headache that resembles those, if it is not treated with the methods of medicine treatment, then we resort to these illnesses: extraction of arteries in the temples or cautery on those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient directs their skin where it's in the temples; and understand the artery noticeable in the temple which is shown by its pulse, and it's hidden only in few people due to the intensity of rubbing.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it's hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and properly rub the area with a hard cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery manifests itself clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the needle of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And properly you prick the artery under that with ease until you reach it; and properly let blood flow into it and extract from there at the outer parts as soon as you remove from that what is in the artery, and uncover those of the tunics which are left from that, for all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is delicate, then wrap it at its extremity with the tip of a thorn, and properly cut out one part according to the quantity by which its extremities extend and are contracted, and do not allow blood flow, for if they are not cut open, the pulse will not rise at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And properly remove a quantity of blood one part. Inside three parts.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then properly make that in two places with double strength at each or with cords long, and do not leave it to rot before the healing of the wound and do not allow flow of the pulse.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And properly cut off the excess which is between two strips; do this either at that time or soon afterwards.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inside the mouth with an operating knife until its extremities are cauterized, and stay in place for this half-finished operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it's better to work this way if the patient has fever or is of cold constitution; since the cautery comes from those causes that help in dissipating moisture, and therefore it's better for youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And properly consider the extraction of arteries that you make at the usual place on the neck, they should be placed over its dirty dust appropriately made, and properly treated with dry medicines to let the skin regenerate and within it until it heals.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during your work another opening occurs and blood flow from the artery happens, then you should restrain that blood flow, or with a cautery, or filling in the place of the cut, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present, then place your hand on the spot where the pain is concentrated, and immerse that area in water with strong coldness inside it until the inflammation rests, and strengthen it as long as it lasts.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And when pus is found during the extraction of an artery, you should use a cautery on the vein with this method: have two knives ready for the cautery. Since you have heated both ends, then place them gently in water until they cool and cut through the vein at two points, so that it can be extended where it meets the extremities, which are not fully hardened by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is how to use the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the heat of both knives be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if your skill allows for both knives to be very hot like two heated points, and they touch the flesh at their hottest without cutting through it too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there's some swelling in those cases, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better for all operations and even the slightest ones.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the distance between the two knives be equal to the thickness of the object being worked on.
Capitol quart.	End of chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of treating bodies affected by sharp, acidic tears in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and the body is affected by veins located above the nose that swell up, and no medicine cure for this condition exists. The patient's face has already reddened, walking around in their room as if it were a group of ants, their eyes are exhausted, wet to the point that their skin seems familiar, their eyelids are scratched due to the sharpness of the tears. The old methods involve treating these conditions with operations like this one, and they also include passing the cure through this method.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you instruct the patient to scratch the skin on their forehead, and then proceed to make three equal-distance incisions along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two thumbs: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears that are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the beginning of the arteries that are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is equal to three thumbs adjusted together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry fabric, place it moistly under the area where the pain is.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the pointed ends of two sharp points; this is how the incision should look:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	it's from one-third to halfway into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape all the way down the line between two incisions towards the middle of the face which is above the bone, and then make this same incision move halfway into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then cut through this point and place another instrument in the first incision, a tool which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not so on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp part you should grasp the connected flesh, and the line inside the bone, place it in that way until it reaches the incision on the other side, then cut all the veins going down from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And continue this incision up to that part of the line, and do this also in the central incision between the other incisions.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when there is an equal amount of blood flowing due to pain, squeeze out the areas with the accumulated blood masses.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then pause at each incision with a little salt, place those burned powders in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixtures, make sure not to create an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, dissolve the mixture and administer large quantities of warm water or tea, then proceed to treat it with basil oil and others in between where the wounds have healed.
Capitol .v.	End of chapter. V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of treating tears by cauterization and the eyes that descend from the internal parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When applied to an artery and continued with heat, and sometimes the eyes of the patient are exhausted, their vision is blurred, and their eyelids are inflamed along with their cheeks. The skin beneath the head also experiences sharp pain leading to extreme discomfort; then understand that these incidents indicate that the substances and cauterizations come from vein particles within the organs.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: instruct the patient to raise their forehead, then make an incision in it at the middle of the forehead, a little smaller than the width (start from the left temple's incision into the right temple; and let the incision go through the bone; extend your hand until the bones under the jaw are revealed).
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the pus with a sponge or dry cloth and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with salt or a cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply over that with powders burned in vinegar and oil to prevent the formation of a cauterized abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you release this and see that the pustule has already diminished, then guide your hand into where it begins in his birth flesh, and place your hand near to cure with an excretory regulation which makes the flesh secrete, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of poppy paste and mix them, and from these make a poultice which is applied to these wounds at the site of natural origin of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	"Capitol .vi." likely refers to a specific section or part within the document that might discuss about the 'capitol', possibly referring to the brain or head as historically some texts used the term 'capitol' for parts of the body, especially in medical writings. The '.vi.' is probably an ordinal indicator denoting this is the sixth part of such discussion. Without more context, it's hard to provide a more detailed interpretation.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Translation:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Translation:
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Translation:
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Translation:
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	Translation:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	Translation:
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Translation:
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Translation:
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Translation:
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Translation:
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Translation:
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	Translation:
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Translation:
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	Translation:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	Translation:
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Translation:
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Translation:
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Translation:
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	Translation: Translation:
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Translation:
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Translation:
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms produced in the ear, when you treat it with what we said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, do not let your treatment go wrong, otherwise look at the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract that one from its place or from the subtle ones, but if no cause appears, then take an opening and make it large, as this is the form of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can tolerate; and then suck through that by strong suction, and do these punctured actions, so that all the worms may be forced out.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not follow my advice with the application, then press and close on the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in treating worms, and refer to these in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if your effusion is to which you will pour the medicinal oils in the ear with this utensil, as it is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of reed, let it be hollowed out, in which there should be a small hole, and on the side.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore as long as there is something inside the cavity of the tube of continence here that needs to be present.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the descending extremity of the crotch, and then pour oil into the cavity of the earlobe, or juice from some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the tube - and that is in the ear - and then insert the rod in the crotch and press on the oil inside until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the earlobe and the patient feels oil internally.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is inserted in the ear should already be heated by fire, a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that the cause which you will distill in the ear should not be too hot, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of treatment for inflammation of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some boils that form on their children's bellies do not penetrate, and this happens sometimes in some people, inflammation inside the earlobe due to an infection or without much flesh there; and this inflammation is performed within the border of the ear canal which does not admit moisture, and some boils are performed outside the parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens at its beginning, which does not allow moisture in, is within the more difficult to heal dispositions.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one where you can reach moisture, know that you should place the ear of the patient to the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you notice an evident inflammation, open it with a subtle spatula as this is its form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which there is a small breadth, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be of two lemon widths on each side that it does not hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the inflammation is due to no flesh in the ear or within its substance, then prepare it with small onions and allow that to penetrate completely into the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the inflammation is at the front of the earlobe, then take a small lemon rod and heat it by fire for a little bit, and then place that in the substance of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have sensed inflammation through the difficulty of hearing, relieve the oppression for them with ease; and remember not to harm the nerves in the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a bandage on the ear according to the width of the canal which you have wrapped in Egyptian oil; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the sore; or take something and immerse it in water, grind it with salted meat juice, and use it; and if you see that the ear is already swollen, then know that you should discard that thing and replace it with another thing which you wrap in lint that is made from rubbed oil, so that the pus may be drained out; and then treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if there is blood discharge, then immerse the sponge or cloth in warm water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that thins out the blood discharge, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of adhesions that occur to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The adhesions that occur to the eyelids of some people are moistened, while some boils remain dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then know that you should have them with small knives or with needles, and separate those with spatulas from their roots, and then place them on the sites with salted meat juice.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if there is pain with blood discharge, then you should apply a cautery to those with the thin plectrum.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to have the incisions and boil discharges return whenever there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are burned with fire, those roots burn and do not recur.
Capitol .ix.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the animals.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Causes that cause swelling in the eyelids of animals, there is an assembly which manifests in their largeness and hardness, and due to its largeness it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it's the addition of large moisture on the eyelid leaves and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So the operation on them is that you should understand if the largeness arises in them from what comes out of the eyelid and expands everywhere; and the cause of it is minor.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So make an incision across that width, and then carefully expose all parts of it inside to allow the removal, and suspend that with hooks and remove that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Perhaps if you do not find the opening of it if not with pus that penetrates into the eyelid in small increments, then it will not be noticeable for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the size is large, then you adjust it with suture; and treat that until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it's little, there won't be harm for that, because the loss from it restores that and heals.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the largeness declines to the inner parts of the eyelid, then you keep the surface inside, so lift that eyelid and suspend that largeness with hooks, another that you use for suture, press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is elongated by suturing, then this will not be noticeable for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the suture point, wash the animal with salt water; and treat the area until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capítulo 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the treatment of excision in the eyelid above the animal's face.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excision is an operation that arises in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially affects children, exacerbates their condition causing them to suffer from conjunctivitis; and they cannot see the brightness of the sun because their tears flow towards them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And you should touch those several times on their foreheads continuously, and sleep with them on their foreheads; and wet their eyelashes with tears, which are already swollen and have an appearance of congestion in the eye; and when you press that area with your finger tips, you will feel congestion inside those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And another method of operation is when the patient puts their head on your hand, and then pulls down the skin and the face with a cautery, makes a circle according to the amount that contains pus from all sides, and then pulls this up over this and presses with your fingers around it so that congestion will accumulate in the middle of the circle, and then cuts halfway into that moisture with a groove across the width, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in lumbotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And in the procedure you should make a complete cut until you reach the congestion, where after that place pus through the cut according to the shape of whiteness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove those with cloths which you have enveloped between your fingers from the outer parts, and rotate it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to press in the incision because at that groove do not reach into the face and remove it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	And if you do not find pus at the beginning of the incision, then press in that incision with a small tool so that pus can flow; and take off that similarly as we said; and then soak cloths from him with water, vinegar and oil, spread them over the area and strengthen those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And in this way they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the incision so that what is moistened by that moisture disappears.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat that with plastered ointments until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Capítulo 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	About methods of touching the face.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of animals natural hairs are aligned and old, then they touch the face and cause behaviors such as excessive tears, pallor of the lids and inner cheek where this is a cause of deterioration of the face known as blepharitis of the face, and treatment is done in four ways: or with a cauterizer fire; or with an acute medicine as it was said in the chapter on cauterization; or is done by incision and suture; or through canals according to what I say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And when you place the head of the animal on your hand; then convert the eyelid of the face to your left hand, if it is converted, then yes; and if not, insert a needle in that where pus exists from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate into the top, this is - close to the edge of the eyelid where hairs come out - close to the hairs, pull the thread upwards on the parts above the eyelid, and convert it to the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then cut in the inner part of the eyelid so that natural hairs are tied with an incision down to the major lacrimal duct at the minor lacrimal; and then pull out the needle and place some dust of camphor or cloth on the eyelid, and then cover it with a tent, this is like the shape of a mallow leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary to determine the shape according to the amount of levigation of the eyelid, which has already been diversified in men, and among those who need that a large quantity of the lid be incised according to the amount for which the lid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make the cut along the two lines you have drawn, starting from the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to natural hairs such as a king's beard.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then insert the needle in one of the two angles of the chain stitch, and then remove it all over. And adjust the stitches on both lips around the mouth or wooly beard. Clean the wound, and keep any excess hairs from covering the eyebrows if you want to do this, otherwise leave it uncured.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then suture the stitches with wool within three or four days and treat it accordingly.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, let the wound's suture dry out, and treat it with what dries and constricts; when you soften the lid, seal off the wound and add to it; however, this suturing is better and so do this for the benefit of many years.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, with concern for the patient, it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to examine, and that means that the figure on the eyelid resembles a leaf of myrtle, and then lift the eyelid with three needles separated and gathered according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, hold the needles, and if this does not match, then take a thread with which you will insert it in the middle of the figure, and place the other hair near the larger tear duct, and the hair near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between your fingers the hairs for equality, and when holding those lift your hand up to that height, lift the entire chain stitch on which it is sewn as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and treat that part that is healed internally.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if pus occurs you must begin your incision or cut, drain that lump with lint and to it resemble, and with ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes there are lumps under the eyelid that their hairs should be converted, then cut as we said about incision; however, suturing in some cases is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	And sewing with needles is according to this shape:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure inside as I have recounted; then, by art make two needles or two fine threads of which length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width resembles that of the stitches.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And add any that have fineness below what is excessive on the eyelid of the animal, and strengthen the stitches of each section with tightness, and let it sit for a few days. For the chain stitch will die from tightness and be rejected and will fall when you put it back itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it takes longer, then cut with the tweezers, and then treat the wound that is healing internally.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, once hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two needles which you should do according to this shape:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And have the length and width of the quantity neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On raising thorny hairs on the animal with forceps when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and prickly on the animal, then in this operation with it you take fine forceps and hold onto that tip of each fine one and lion, and adjust its extremities finely without crushing any part.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads is as much as a hand.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you make another fine thread from it quickly, and if you want, adjust its extremities.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the animal's head in its usual position, close to the sun so that your work may be seen clearly, for this is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the hair follicle adjusting it where it needs to be pricked, and make it penetrate the eyelid gently until you extract that above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair inside and insert it into the follicle, with one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand into that follicle so that the hair is pulled out from the follicle in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	And if the hair is pulled out along with it and not the hair, you will pull it out along with it from the parts leaving the thread that you have made in this manner, where inside there will be pulled out hair from the root.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And remove that from the animal's view, where then you will pull out the hair and the thread, and cut all and clean the wound, and let the wound heal for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows new good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair of natural hairs, and raise it up to that place or lets it stay in so as to be elongated near some space, and then you raise that.
Capitol .xiii.	Title of Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the treatment for ahacratir, which manifests on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When ahacratir is seen, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it tightens around its edge, or on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of pus, blood clot or cautery, it is called leporine. This ahacratir is either natural or accidental; it is caused by consolidation of pus, blood clots, or cauterization, or by similarity in their symptoms.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation for the patient is as follows: you should cut open that consolidation and separate the labia from him. Place a piece of linen cloth in the area between those two parts, and tie them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not cover the patient with any treatment that dries and constricts. If you perform such treatments, ahacratir can worsen much more than it was before at any time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use remedies that soften such as fennel, and soak them in water with a piece of linen cloth, or apply almond oil, which should be mixed with some oils and then immerse the cloth in it. Treat with this preparation.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the key to your treatment is that you should puncture all chambers that are not consolidated according to the form it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is simply a correction of ahacratir which does not return to the original shape as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Title of Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	About the treatment for ahacratir which occurs in the eyelid above.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ahacratir which occurs in the eyelid above is called vertically ahacratir; it can be either a natural one for the patient, or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental ahacratir is caused by pus, cuts, cauterization, or other similar conditions.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation for this is to take a needle with a double thread and place it in the skin. Then you should make it pass through the left lacrimal into the right, so that the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the skin to the sides on the needle and hold it against the needle, and cut open the wide space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if the eyelid returns to its original shape as expected, it is good; otherwise, take out the thread and hold it at the cut edge, and by doing this reshape the eyelid, making both cuts on the left side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision area that you made inside where they meet, and make an angle among them so that when they come together it forms their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda (Λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove that amount of skin which corresponds to the length of the tip of your finger on one side of it, so as to flatten the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then treat those with the remedies we have said for softening medicines and bandages so that they heal.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if vertical ahacratir occurs due to a cut, stitch, or cauterization, you should open it with a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been described previously.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the bandage between two layers as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the total discussion of treating ahacratir when it is above or below, the operation proceeds according to how ahacratir is prepared in the form of various spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And skilled artisans always prepare chambers in every manner that is possible for the patient so as to make it return to its natural shape or close to it, and the patient according to what suits him from the operation and tools in their best arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Title of Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	About the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens in middle-aged men, so that the eyelid sticks more above the white of the eye, and prevents ease of movement and natural actions, it is necessary to insert the tip of your finger under the eyelid, lift it up on one side, or extend it towards the nose.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you make a slight incision for the adhesion to the thin space underneath, which is not at the sharpness of the cuts, having an obtuse edge so that the patient does not feel disturbed by the operation, and leave the tissue without damaging the eye's sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it removes that adhesion with ease, returning the eyelid to its natural shape and allowing total healing of the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put salt water in your eye, or distil it from juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with bandage on him, place wool infused in egg white on your eye, and for several days use remedies that consolidate until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the causes of inflammation and the prominence of flesh in the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that gout comes in two ways, either it is nervous, resembling a thin hard tissue; or it is non-nervous, resembling white moisture that has coagulated. When you touch this, or it causes swelling there, it makes that swell up like an onion, and when it's removed, the onion does not remain with it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these species do not begin until within the larger tear duct where it grows slowly, covering the view and preventing light and movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to operate in the case of it is that the patient holds their head in its place, and then opens their eyes, lifting the eyelid with your hand, and then removes the gout like a thin onion layer and extends that up to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take an awl and insert it into that with a piece of horse or bull or cow hide, or one resembling, or from a strong beast, or double the tip of the awl gradually and place that in the middle of the gout, penetrating that to the needle, and fix that at its end; and extend that upwards, and scrape under the skin around the tip of the gout which severs the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And continue following that into the hair under the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then cut the remainder in the recess of the tear duct through a thin slit or with small cuts, and leaves the flesh of the tear duct natural so that by operation of this does not cause continuous weeping.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the gout extends under the sun's onion or from its root, as we have said, and then it is excised through a long slit which this is the shape of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And remember that when you are on the slit do not touch the corneal membrane and that it avoids in it rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And during the operation it affects in the eye a little of salted or cooked meat from a pig, and leaves that inside another day; and then treat that with water that covers until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the gout is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle in that under the onion, then this type of gout heals with medicines, and it is treated like this as I have said and recommended in this section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut that out, then open the eye of the patient and make a long slit with an incisive blade according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you notice that it is thinned and mixed up and spreads into that recess, then distil from your mouth in the eye of cooked pork meat or in a hog's head or in salted meat, and apply the eye inside another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then iteratively perform the operation until all that is from you has been removed, but if instead pus appears in the eye, then leave it and treat the pus inside until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeatedly perform your operation on that at reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the tear flesh, if noticed in the eye due to great damage, is suspended under the onion; and cut a part from that at each time, and do not finish the operation so as not to cause weeping.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distil over the tear duct with hog's head meat and cooked pork until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the operation of eyelid enlargement and what is born from adjusted flesh in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some swellings in the eyelids of some are born from cooked flesh, and it is over-stretched to cover the pupil, or approaches or strengthens against the eyelashes, causing the eyelashes to press against the parts forward and is assembled to rub against the mullions.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on it is that the patient holds their head in place; and then open the eyelids of that and gather all that flesh with convenient onions for water, and hold that with forceps or pincers; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything ends with the scissors, and remember not to let go that you must perform your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And make your cut like the one in which you cut those or with a narrow slit as we have recommended in the operation of gout, or with small cuts where they collect scales according to how it comes close to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your operation is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with salted meat, or distil in it powdered pork meat and resembling those of corrosive medicines, and place over the eye outwardly cut with egg white until pus is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of eyelid enlargement and it has been removed by cautery, and you fear pus will appear, then leave the eye and treat that pus with water that softens that pus, and then repeatedly perform surgery on that at reason until it heals, similarly do this to the adjusted flesh which happens in the eyelids of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must understand that all healing of the eye with through natural or accidental means operates by fire, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until this member suffers from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	From the collection of arrows in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Arrows injure veins which are obstinate in the wound and prevent blood circulation, they also cause inflammation of the wound along its length for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary for the consumption that you consider if the wound in which there is an arrow is strong and in it there is no other illness than the arrow, then you remove that arrow.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to put their head in your place, and suspend those veins with one ounce or two according to your judgment; and that one ounce of fine duplication is as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or gradually from two ounces in a single object as follows:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And those veins should be suspended with fine strings, with thinness, and remove the wound bit by bit, while you observe those veins to swell from the wound and become retracted.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And remember that you do not let the wound touch the extremities of the stump; and if your operation is in mid-morning facing the sun, and are steadfast in your operation, that you only cut those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then in the wound you distill vinegar or wine so that its acidity will corrode what has swollen from the arrow.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it's not possible for you to remove everything in that hour, then cover everything with what relieves the pain of them, and let them rest for a few days until their pain is soothed and the pus pocket has been confirmed.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then treat them as per the customary methods until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the hammers:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Regarding the reduction of hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with a cautery or with quick burning medicine according to the description of them and they are not healed, then it is not good for them in any way but you must make cuts over the pus pocket waiting for its maturity, and remove all the moisture that is in them until you discover the opening, then place your hands when exposed to discover the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, once you have discovered the bone and see corruption or blackness in it, then you treat them with an herb of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called aspice cap, and it is made of iron, and the head should be red like an apple also so that when you make it pierced by the point of a file or finely ground (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that over the corrupted area of the bone, and then move it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption has been removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done with some passes, and then restore the area with drying causes and coagulative agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the area is consolidated and you have a good cut in them, and it is removed from the source of disease for forty days, and it does not renew itself and there is no pus pocket and no incident occurs in them, then you will know that they are healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in them but to reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: you should discover from second bone or with acute medicine, and when you have discovered the bone, then take possession as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of your iron be triangular, and the shaft of it is primarily thinned inside to the extremity as shown here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that over the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little inside the wound, and then rotate your hand in the area until it penetrates all the bone, and they feel the patient through this when you touch their hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	And then restore the area with stictic drying medicines as one should do.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And when the flesh and the area have hardened, then the matter which flowed to the parts goes back to the nose, therefore that is minor pus over the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Regarding the reduction of swelling in the wound.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the wound swells up to its entirety and does not cause harm or diminution, then you should release the patient, and follow them as they continue, and blow many times on their neck in front of the incision and allow good exhalation; and then place liniment over the wound which is made of garlic and aloe and vinegar and powdered saffron, and cover it with plaster powder on the wound.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of the powders is that you take cloths made from powdered lemon, and each cloth should be divided into four parts; then make them.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the wound needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen them with a firm bandage; and apply the suction cups to the suction in front of the incision; and take off the suction cups and let the wound stretch for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	And if meanwhile the ligament becomes softened, then you should keep it strongly tightened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And hold the ligament tightly day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the heat already reduced, that's good, and if not, then apply repeatedly the plaster with the powders and the compression and the suction cups inside until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the emergence of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When disruption occurs in the uveal membrane, and then it becomes prominent like a slight swelling under the eyelids, similar to the start of an inflammation. Its shape resembles that of an individual, henceforth known as such. If you want to proceed with this operation, here's how we recommend doing it: You will enter the needle into the area of the uvea at the point you left off from below and then another at a place where there is double thickness at the lacrimal part, have that needle penetrate and smooth out the first needle according to its position; subsequently cut the area corresponding to the double eyelid and lift up that part of the uvea into the groove of the needle, and reinforce that movement.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place it on top of the heated woolen thread in the aqueous humor, allowing it to settle inside until the thread is submerged by the vitreous humor.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the heat with water that will ensure that thing stays in place while the injury heals.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes the healings gather from all parts around the circle of cloth near the heat prominence large, and then it is pierced with a subtle pin that reaches to the root of the heat, and drain the phlegm moisture, and descend the heat and come in shortly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And reinforce until it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of conjunctivitis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness known as conjunctivitis is nothing but an inflammation that occurs in the eye like water flowing out, and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treatment for this condition involves having the patient lie down on the padded surface and straighten their head, placing your hands at both ends as you observe where the inflammation seems to be spreading towards the previous areas. Then ensure it dries up without descending further, keeping the light constant; the patient observes these developments as they happen.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if it is not ready for the descent of the inflammation as we have mentioned, then have the patient lie between your hands and take a subtle needle to place upon the skin, piercing through to slightly cut into the conjunctiva membrane at the corneal part (into the location you see), so that the inflammation comes out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is released, then you apply a distilled water caud to the eye in which you have mixed honey or water in which you already cooked fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat all the other causes until it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water in the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which one is suitable to pierce during the declaration of symptoms, then use that type according to their health condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then have the patient lie down between your hands on a mattress and hold their head steady.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your right hand near the eyelid of their eye, if it's the eye with water in it is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take garlic if the eye is on the left side; or with your left hand if the eye is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then press the end of garlic near the crown by the thickness of the ray in the aqueous humor's part from the nasal tear duct, and then peel garlic with its skin and turn your hand towards it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the aqueous humor and feel that garlic has reached the cause of sight due to its presence.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And when the length of garlic's path to its root matches the size of the space from the pupil to the edge of the darkness, this is the boundary of the eye; you will see the pupil with eye visibility due to the clarity of the corneal membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place garlic into the area where there is water, and press it down slightly once or twice. If the water descends immediately, then have the patient lie on their back with their eye open towards the garlic in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then take a slight pause; if the water has descended, then remove that press before garlic gets heated.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it's heated and doesn't descend, then extract garlic easily, turn your hand slowly, dissolve a little bit of clear salt from gemstone in water and with that wash the inside of the eye; then place wool soaked in pressed oil and aqueous humor outside the eye to cool.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And it's best for those of our time to take a brief respite while eating something on top of the aqueous humor.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you don't feel your garlic inside the eye due to its hardness - which is typical for some individuals whose eyesight is hard - then know that you should take the needle called albede, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that conjunctiva with it, and don't end your hand on the teeth, but rather make a path to where garlic is located deeply.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the needle as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should prepare the patient's bed so that they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place the patient's head naturally so that their body is lined naturally and does not turn to either side.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the limbs be placed according to their natural position in the bed for the entire day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then move them from one dark mattress to another and expose the cold view, make them see some causes, and later return their limbs back into bed for day VII.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And don't do this at the time of treatments or just before infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is wise for you to avoid doing this so that water can pass very little by great and violent consideration.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If it happens that there is an abscess, then know that you should move the bed before day VII, and correct whatever allows the abscess to form.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should avoid the view of the patient and place your face over their mouth from which their breath is regulated for several days, existing in the dark mattress.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually get out of that mattress and talk about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that during surgery, the student should avoid seeing some operations, and thus your focus remains on the procedure.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already been reached to us some of those who are in the Artach, and some say that you should make a hole in the perforated magdaam where water can drain.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, it is not seen here in our land a perfect way, nor has this been written in any of the ancient books; and this could be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms for the different types of magdaam, in order that one should perform them on those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of iron or properly steel, and their extremities are at this level of triangular subtlety, the acute end is like that one, which is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Regarding the treatment of wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various types of nasal wounds joined together, and one cause among them is gathered in the weighty matter, or as a polypus on the face; this disease is called a polypus that resembles that face represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if it's a cancerous wound, it is reddened, discolored; and of this kind, it is that the wound is lion-like not colored darkly.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So in the one that is in these lion-like wounds that are not fraudulent nor cancerous, know that you should make the patient lie between your cushions and place them under sunlight, breathe their nostrils, and pinch your thumb in those wounds.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the forward parts, and then remove whatever you have understood from those at a sharp, subtle point in one part between which you know that all flesh has been exposed; if there is any cause that can be excised from the patient, then cut this with one of the finer instruments so that by cutting this cause escapes.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If it happens that you have to drain or an abscess occurs, then stop doing this for the patient; or if it's from malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize in there where the excision of the cause can be done, and all cavities are exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then get out from the nose near the incision area with water or blood.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is open and there's moisture inside the palate from this process, then know that it has already been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as you do, then know that inside the patient is flesh with pus in your nose bones where there has been no excision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So then you should insert a needle into him where there is some lump, and blow in the pus, and pause between each breath with the amount of what was said or monthly, and make the patient blow one end of the needle into their nostril or another cause which might be possible for them.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after doing this, have them blow their odor into where it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and stand over their mouth, which causes many symptoms in these actions that children do to their ears, and is a slight cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two ends of the needle, one end that sticks out over the nose and the other that penetrates into the nose, and apply a bandage to the flesh in the nostrils that are in the needle, do this until you know that the flesh is inside the nostrils of the needle.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the needle, pause in the nose near the removal of pus with a caulk, and do this for three days or longer until the infection has completely disappeared from all parts of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose with a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you are performing a drying cure, use that method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the device for nasal evacuator which boils oils and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this with silver or iron which resembles a small open lamp, like a small pot, and its mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument to the cap-purging maker and let it be flat, exposed; on which one hold in the backside of him, where you take it when you dip into his oil or whatever you want from its products and causes that can be extracted.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This purification is expensive: the recipe includes castor oil, white balm, ginger, mullein of the meadow, long pepper, snail slime, and the root of wild thyme. Mix with the blood and the gall, and make them into pills, then take one pill with boiling water, and let it sit on the patient's stomach in the opposite direction.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the mucus at the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Blocked mucus is in the extremities of the nose, and this swelling gets bigger or softer within a few days during which one should observe closely.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that purpose, you need to introduce it at the beginning of the patient's condition, and release all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause over the area or with a cautery or burning medicine which is in place of him.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If his introduction is delayed until it gets bigger, then consider if it's a tumor, hard, of dark color and with little sensation; then don't touch that with iron which is an abscess; the swollen mucus around this abscess must be avoided due to its great malice towards that on which that person was.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is like a lion's touch and not of dark color, and an introduction becomes possible in all that area, then evacuate the patient and introduce that sign fearlessly, and cure the place with what dries out and restricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About stitching the nose, lips and earlobe when the continuity is dissolved by disease or trauma.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that if you accidentally dissolve the continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little to do during this operation rather than some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So understand, when faced with any cause of those conditions, consider if it is a fresh wound on the patient's hand, and then you adjust both sides of the wound's lips for stitching, and then cure that until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolved continuity are already separated, and each is a healthy part, then know that you should remove every part of its external condition until there is no more pain.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust both lips with stitching and strengthen them; over these sprinkle a handful of dragon's wound on the powder, and place it in strips, then cover that powder with two or three days worth of a drying plaster, or another from among consolidating plasters, and let the bandage rest for those two to three days until the scabs fall off by themselves, and then treat with ointment until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The way of the stitching is that you add the continuity solution or with needles as we have recommended in stitching the abdomen, or add the continuity solution with wax according to your preference and inform about it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About extracting those causes that come in the two lips in the parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Swelling can be seen in swollen men in the parts inside of their lips like hard abscesses resembling lard, and some are softer and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So understand that you should convert the lips and each opening of all those hard swellings from every part, then cover the extraction with strips of wax until there is constriction in the wound, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the place with what promotes healing until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About introducing the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Much swelling appears above the adjusted flesh in the gum which the ancients called albus; therefore understand that you should suspend this one with a stick or whatever you have for that under it, and introduce it with its root, and let the clean blood or the wound run.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then pause over the place covered with wax or other收敛 powders or stimulants.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then introduce it again, and burn this one; for the burning will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About tooth extraction with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the parts inside and in front, and between the gums, hard stumps appear that are yellowed or some swellings are blackened, they cause citron or sourness to occur within which the gum decays, and they cause the teeth to become yellow.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So understand that you should separate the patient's thighs from your servants and place his head in its proper position, remove the teeth where these stumps appear along with similar causes of dirt inside so that no unnecessary cause is damaged, and do this for the blackness, sourness, and others until they are modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if this is like what happens during the process of extraction, it's good; and otherwise, then you continue the extraction on those to another day and to the second and third until it reaches the end stage as you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require hot rods of various shapes and pokers of figures according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And know which razor to use for each tooth's size from the inside of your mouth is another about the tooth razor according to its position between the teeth in various ways, and these types of razors should be prepared by you as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On removing teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Make sure you cure the tooth of its pain from root to tip and proceed with the entire extraction process until it is finished, so that there is no reason for the wound to heal in place when extracted, as it is a substance within which the healing occurs during the extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Understand when the patient insists on having that tooth removed; you must firmly be certain which tooth is causing pain, as various wounds allow pain to spread into healthy teeth and fall upon them. When you remove that tooth, if the pain does not cease until the sick tooth is extracted, we have already seen this in operations on rabbits.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So you must be certain which tooth is causing pain and that you know how to do it well. Then understand that when you scrape in the circuit of the tooth at its root, where there might be a virtue, while dissolving the tooth from gingiva all around, and carefully move towards your words or with fine saws at their beginning gradually until this scrape works.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And later wash with strong forces large gashes for good speech or swelling, hold the head of the patient between your thumbs so you have to not allow it to swell, and move the tooth according to its rectitude in a way that doesn't damage it, nor cause more pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it's not removed when it should be, then take one of those instruments and place the patient's foot from all sides with ease and force the removal of that thing so that it is done at its beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is twisted or corroded, then understand that you must remove that twist and tighten it at its subtle end so that it doesn't get twisted during your compression on it with your thumbs.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And understand that you should open it delicately with scraping in the circuit of all parts of the gum and maintain your strength so that you don't damage it and break any part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is more than the first pain of them.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be aware that you should not do what other ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity during extraction; they don't provide the things we have recommended. Various wounds cause great troubles among humans which are harder to correct than twists, and all parts of their teeth become broken or some parts of them, or whatever extracted from those areas as various twisted points that we have witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And when the extraction is complete, wash your mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if you need to flush out the wound for this purpose, like various wounds do, then take a small amount of zinc and sprinkle it over the injury. If that zinc doesn't work, then use a cautery instead.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and fine thumbs that are twisted by which tooth is pulled at the beginning should be elongated with a longer handle, short in width and thick, so they don't bend when working on those.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	They should be like this with thick thumbs so that when you stretch them on those they don't bend, and have short handles.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They should be made of Indian iron with thin and straight handles, and in the ends of those have teeth where one fits into another and stretches through compression with descending strength. Some wounds have the ends of those like a bird's beak which is called stork, this is its shape and they are made strong by compression.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and extraction of twisted jaw bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a twisted tooth for some reason, then understand that you should place your hand over the spot with pressure for one finger or two until the area is softened; and then insert an object or use fine thumbs which are assembled like the beak of a bird called stork or guant, the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be made inside in such a way like chisel or almond.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not follow your judgment with these forceps or thumbs, then understand that you should dig into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the tool which is called atali, this is its form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short handle and be thin on one end that is small, and not bent so that it doesn't become twisted.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the root is removed by this method, it's good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other tools whose forms are:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it should have a triangular and even more delicate end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you will be helped by this tool having two slopes, the shape of which is approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And there are other tools that precede in the process of tooth scraping; where youth is done with this tool which resembles an old bear, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular or bent/curved extremity, which is some sort of swelling, and should not be squeezed by one's own hand for fear of causing injury.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the tools used for tooth extraction are similar to other surgical instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the craftsman be wise and skilled in his art, finding what suits himself according to how it means the operation and various diseases; these are the diseases to which the ancients neither described nor used proper instruments, due to their varying shapes.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be that the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken, or if you place pressure, then your hand rests on that at its location according to what is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in tooth extraction, and helps with this gesture where this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any swelling, take it step by step, tie or hold it in the mouth so that it doesn't escape or go into the place where the bone is pierced; and then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that in the bone there is a small opening, then treat that along with its coloration, and cure that within where it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural course due to that particular form being elongated, especially more so in women and particularly among older respectable ladies; therefore consider this: if the tooth is slightly closer to another tooth, and it's not possible for extraction or application of a solution on it, then that tooth is considered to be deeply rooted; but if it is not attached to any other tooth, then you should insert that tooth with this tool which has this form; and it resembles cutting pork, made from Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your attempt to cut that part where you are going to insert it takes too many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and there is no similar area among other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it's a prominent tooth that has worn down to the point of needing grinding, then grind that with an Indian iron grinding tool which has this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it's all made of Indian iron and the groove is formed similarly as you would grind with a tool that has needles, where the tooth is ground slowly bit by bit in physical days for ease, so that there is no similar tooth that gets damaged and breaks.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw that (a line) at the end, and scrape that with another razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it's a tooth where one part is broken and lies against the tongue, then consider that you should smooth out that area where that roughness of that fraction exists and is equalized, and be filled so that the tongue doesn't slip or the word doesn't get corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On restoring teeth that have worn down at their tips with pewter or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to teeth before crumbling and removal due to impact or due to smashing, and the patient can't strengthen themselves upon what they eat, and you have treated that with stomatic medicines, and your treatment hasn't been effective; then for those which weaken at pewter (silver) and not at silver, where silver turns green and after a few days you can apply it directly, but gold doesn't change over any amount of time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the paste should have such subtlety and coarseness according to how much can fit between teeth; as for the process, take the paste and place twice the amount between two healthy teeth. Then gradually grow it in the middle of the paste between two worn teeth, whether one or several, until it reaches the thread of the healthy tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat this process within that part which you began with, and strengthen your hand in ease and wisdom so that it doesn't become worn down.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And if your scrape is the one by which you strengthen the pewter, you should have the teeth that don't slip out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then use forceps or remove them all, and add those to any location through your gesture, and convert those and the hidden ones between healthy teeth and worn teeth, so that it doesn't cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then smooth out that one as you would with a Roman tool.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	May it be that if it's displaced or broken, strengthen that one or those with another pewter in such a manner throughout all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure for restoring two healthy teeth and two worn ones, as you would apply these techniques:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it's done that one tooth or two are returned to their original position in all those places, and grow as we have recommended, and that they wear down.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not perform this except for skilled artisans and wise people.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some diseases are suitable for the bones of cattle, and it's done in the same way as a tooth, and placed at the location where the tooth fails, and is strengthened similarly as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the treatment of tongue swelling which impedes speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament of the tongue which causes some diseases or is naturally present in humans, or accidentally occurs due to an injury which has already been healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on you is that you open the mouth of the patient, with its head existing in your seat; and raise their tongue, and then carefully cut into that ligament of nerves according to the width within which their tongue can be released from their recent position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or disturbance in that area, and this has been treated with the consolidation of the lesion, then you apply one measure of heat and cut through it along the width where you have separated the ligament, so that the node can be dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And remember not to cause a crack in the base of the flesh, and cut here carefully so that blood may flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then, wash away the residue of the cut with water or add oil or sand to it; and then rest your hand on the patient's tongue; this will ensure that the patient's tongue remains moist each night in order that it not be hardened again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is blood flow, place your hand on the heated spot; but if the blood leaks out, then cauterize the area with a hot cautery which you should use for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And that cure other causes within where it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Concerning the removal of a hernia, care for the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some swellings occur, causing a small pus-filled lump to form that impedes the tongue's normal operation; and its size increases as it fills the mouth with unpleasant odor.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure for you is to open the mouth of the patient at the sun's position and examine the lump.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find it a dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that lump as it is malignant.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is whitened with moisture, then you place the heat in them, and cut into it delicately with a scalpel, cutting from all sides; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you pause over that heated spot, which is hot, within which you restrain the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated it according to its condition, wash it with oil and salt; and treat that according to the other treatment needed so that it heals.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Concerning the removal of a lump from both ears and that which is located in the armpit, as well as other lumps.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it comes across in the armpit area, they are glands that are grouped like cotton balls, which occur outside and are named as the two ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and if they do not heal, then you should consider whether the lump is hard, has a dark color, little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is reddish in color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of blood flow; wait until it matures internally, then either you remove it from there, or it may break on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, the root is round, and the thread of its root is delicate, then that must be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the procedure for you is to examine before your operation whether the lump has rested with rest or if it has decreased due to some diminution; then place the head of your patient in front of the sun, and open their mouth, and have the servant take hold of the tongue of the patient between their hands using this noble instrument whose form is:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or gold, and delicate as a thread.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press the tongue and it shows you the lump, and you place your hand over it, then take heat and put that in your seat, and pull that out from all sides as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another thing when you remove some cause of the tunics, then carefully cut it with this tool whose shape is:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It resembles forceps, yet the ends of these are curved, so that each one's opening is opposite another, sharp points, which should be made of iron and bent inward.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this tool is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel whose shape matches this description: It should be sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have cut one side, cut the other according to this method of incision, and when cutting for the patient, it is recommended to hold water sand.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is blood flow, hold water from the decoction of horse chestnut sap or mistletoe leaves and treat it similarly to the causes of stasis where bleeding stops, then proceed to cure it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes swellings occur in the armpit other lumps besides the two ears, and you should cut those according to what I have said about cutting two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was located in the groin area of her, this abscess had a color tending towards dark brown, with little sensation, which had already closed off the groin area for her, and the woman was breathing very painfully, she had already been forbidden to eat and drink water by him, and she was already close to death if more days were passed.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so much that it contained two months' worth of pus, which flowed through for two groins.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I cut him surgically and placed him in one of his elbows, then pulled him out, removing a large portion from him. Next, I burned the opening where pus was understood to be coming from another arm, and then forced open his mouth, constricting his tongue. Finally, I left the elbow in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I removed a large part of him, and there was only a little bleeding from him.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore completely the groin of that woman is healed, she began drinking water immediately, and soon resumed eating. So I didn't let any pus emerge from that abscess for a long time, instead an abscess formed in place of it, which continued to grow as that one was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I went in and burned the groin area of him, this was to improve; and then I walked around not knowing what God did with that afterwards.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the expulsion of pus when it is inflamed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When phlegm settles in the throat, and it is inflamed and long, then it is called a perpendicular. And if it's at the point where it becomes thick and round, then it's referred to as a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it's healed according to what we've discussed in the division, and you don't continue with your treatment, and after several times of pus expulsion that has stopped for him and is delicate, then I would suggest you insert one that becomes added roundly; and if it's at that length, and it bleeds, being of dark or black color, and doesn't reach his sensation, then I would advise you to try the expulsion from him, where there's fear on the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you perform that according to the method I've told you about in terms of its whiteness and length, that you check the patient and press his tongue with an instrument whose shape corresponds to this, place the elbow near the new area, pull it down, and then insert it with one of the two instruments which were mentioned in the expulsion of two abscesses.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And know that you should not insert it until it's adjusted to the natural end of your treatment, for if you insert more than this, you will injure his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And near the expulsion, use the one we recommended in the expulsion of two abscesses, and treat it until he is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient was frightened by the expulsion of him, know that you should use forceps in the cauterization of him, and the way to perform the cauterization is with hot water only. So place the head of the patient towards your side, then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier. Take the hot water which we have told about in the chapter on cauterization, pour it onto that live area, pause when it's neither thick nor delicate, and fill the concavity of the tool whose shape this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of his cavity where medicine is placed be like the cavity of a mouth, and place the tool on the water with him, the patient lying down on their back so that saliva or mucus from their mouth flows through the intrinsic medicine, so as not to cause any harm to his groin and to relieve him.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then hold your hand on the medicine, and press it over the uvula for about half an hour until you see that the area has become discolored and numbed by the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take hold of the skin and the flap over the end of the ray, immerse the stick in medicine, insert the ray into the tube with the stick within it so that the stick adheres to that tube. Do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let that rest until it dries and falls off about three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do that and after cauterization cleanse it in the path of the uvula with a moistened stick, change what is inside that part of him from the path of his medicine, wash it with water rinse and afterwards treat it with ointment, and internally use remedies until he is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment saves from expulsion and long fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some healings are performed on the uvula with that subtle type of cauterization and expulsion, which is cured through subinhalation in this manner: gather calendula, hyssop, chamomile, rue, powdered gum Arabic, camomile, groundnut oil, and other similar herbs, adjust all those causes or some of them into a single bowl, let them steep in hot water, they should bubble; heat the water until it's lukewarm, then strain it, place the water bowl on half a cup, on which place an aram tool according to this manner: made of silver or metal.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And immerse the extremity in the mouth of the patient where steam rises over the uvula onto the quanaula, where the uvula is moving and obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then proceed to cut through those pus-filled areas within where it is dry, and remember not to perform this treatment immediately after the appearance of abscesses, as that would exacerbate in the abscess, and you should not do this but rather declare the abscess's presence with caution.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you cannot present this instrument, then take a cane and apply a cloth to the extremity of the patient's foot, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, for which the eucalyptus leaves prevent the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Regarding the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the gallbladder, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Pus-filled areas adhere in the gallbladder or thorns of leaves or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should extract what is evident from those, on which your attention falls, because when you press the tongue against the tool in front of the soleilh, then you will declare what is in the gallbladder.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and remains hidden in the gallbladder, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because a strong cause related to the gallbladder will lead to vomiting; or force the patient to swallow a piece of bread or grated lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a handful of dried marine sponge and tie it firmly with thread, then make the patient swallow that; or if you have access to it, use a mustard poultice. Once this is done, if it reaches the location where thorns are located and they are extracted, then the cause will be eliminated.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a snake and drink it with bound thread, then put it in the mouth gently until it is extracted; or take a stick and gently place it inside her and pull it out gently.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of those causes we mentioned are eliminated, then use a lead tool according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if the pus is large and splits small, then at the extremity of which you enter into her throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And have her raise her head up, and be careful not to touch the base of her throat, for fear that it will harm her body or cause the bone or thorn to pierce the bone or stick, or what the doctor puts in his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, let the patient insert honey, according to their knowledge of the location of the related cause and pierce it downwards, then pull her hand towards the tool while all this is happening as much as she has been prepared with for elimination.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Regarding the extraction of gallstones attached to the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treated with the medicines we have described in the division of treatment through medicine and if it does not respond, consider now in the gallbladder of the patient at the soleilh, since you have pressed her tongue against the tool which we recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you rotate the gallstone, extract it in a small way or through subtle gestures.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it from there, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the gallbladder of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula an iron rod lit on fire, and do this as many times (until the gallstone dies and comes out of the gallbladder) and forbid her any water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a basin full of water to rinse with, and open her mouth in that, and rinse her mouth with that; do not swallow any cause from that but let the water sit for an hour beside her hand, until she feels the water come.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	And if it is not eliminated by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or with asafetida using the tool we recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and see what happens.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another way of operating in fumigation is to take an ember with lit coals and the ember is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a handle, you place the extremity of the tool in that handle; then proceed with the fumigation above; have the patient put her mouth at the extremity of the cannula and close her mouth so that the fumigation does not penetrate until you know that the fumigation has reached the gallstone, as soon as the gallstone will fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, then you should continue the fumigation for several times, forbid the patient to drink, and eat salty foods and vegetables, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be properly carried out.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the tool with which gallstones in the gallbladder are treated when they are seen; it resembles forceps like these, but instead being curved somewhere on her.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is flat towards the gallbladder, and the extremity of which resembles the beak of a stork that is curved, which is shaped by grinding, for when you grasp any cause, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the total speech pertains to consideration of boils and sections related to them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Boils are special lumps, according to manner of occurrences, based on their memory recall, from any in this free.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in puncturing and sectioning them through two manners, of which one is for the special boils within themselves; and from this we acquire knowledge about humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is for the places where they occur in the body, when a boil happens in the head it is another from a boil happening in the anus; and a boil in the fleshly location is another from a boil happening at joints; and each one of them has its role for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And many boils are some that cover, which are not punctured but rather until the healing matures in those or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other boils are those that cover until they are ruptured when crossed, and do not mature according to their completion, like boils near joints; when a boil approaches a joint, its being extends within what is in the circuit of it, and makes it so that it corrupts the muscles or nerves from that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it's a boil near the main body, and if you delay the puncturing of it until it matures inside it affects the main body; or it's near the anus, therefore puncture what is not matured; and do not cover when you puncture across from incomplete digestion, but rather the one near the anus, so that you don't prevent its extension to the parts inside the anus, and make a fistula, or it's made in the end of it that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Many are those you know when to perform the puncturing of the boil, which is when it matures.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it matures when the pain and fever diminishes, and the decrease of the swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the boil's head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when covered you know to puncture in the place of pus left from the boil and pus coming from the healing of the exudation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Puncture at the right length of the flesh or body, if boils are in the limbs or feet, and on the spots of the scars, from the nerves' cords, from the arteries; and, beyond that, in all equal places where they do not reflect. For those reflecting ones, use puncturing according to that limb.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the boil is in a fleshly place, then it's that you wait for the digestion of it to be confirmed until its completion according to what we've said; if you puncture this ahead of time, it extends the circuit of its discharge and sordic matter, making the lips of it so hardened and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And such boils are punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to which one requires for a limb.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And know that you should administer small punctures, and in large boils a big and wide or narrow sections according to the variety of the sizes of the boils.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other boils are those in which it is that the canal is conformed and ignited when made like this bread, thus within a term that already continues, like those that happen too many of dublecs and bubos.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in section have three angles; and of those it's as if incised like a thorn figure, like the boils of angonars.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them there are for which round and lunar sections are administered, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And for that one which does not have a cap like superficial boils, you puncture that in superficial puncturing, or flatly just.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the boil is thick and has already collected healing matter, you puncture that without worrying about extracting all of the pus in that moment; having extracted some part from it, then place the boil inside another day, and soon after extract a larger part, and then make these drained holes according to stages until it drains.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is of greenish vitality, or a female in pregnancy, or a young child, or an old person in decrepitude, where the animal spirit's aged matter resolves during the discharge of healing, and makes them so weak, then you open these.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you puncture these boils for which you clean the wounds, know that you examine each boil's condition within it or from its position; and if the boil is large, and the openings of the puncturing are round, then it's that you pause the method in every draw until they reach their time.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the boil an extent of the canal has been removed or has become concave within its circuit, then you complete it from your position old or with a needle made of cloth material, like when you pull out bread or pieces, considering moisture; strengthen that inside the third day; and process this and heal what comes from the ointments until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if there happens bleeding from sickness during your operation time, you administer water baths and vinegar in those you wash with a cloth of it, then place that over the area of the blood's gushing points, making these drained.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of the sweat persists, then it is necessary that you administer treatment and care and powders as I have recommended in specific locations of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter time, and the site of the abscess is near the nerves location, then you should coat powders in vinegar and oil, and place those over the sites.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the sites are fatty, then you should place ground powders in water or oil, or in vinegar and oil, and let that be rubbed until the hot day ends as we have said, and then you should open the abscess and cleanse that, and administer to its care whatever suits it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary of knowledge about the universal treatment of abscesses, but according to the path of distinction already described for all abscesses in which manner their cure should proceed for each case specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Regarding the section of abscesses that occur in the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the scalp of the head are small abscesses, which are special glands that contain tunics at their roots; and the types of these are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they have pus, and those contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And there are others that contain moisture resembling dust, similar to them; and those are cold ones, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should extract the pus of those without causing pain to the patient.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you puncture those with an instrument whose shape resembles this, which is called an awl, knowing that it contains pus.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is moisture, then divide that in the section according to its length by a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start at the section of the line B between the line G. So as moisture is drained away, then you scrape off that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause from it all, for if anything reappears after scraping off those causes, if there remains any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that wound with this and leave it for another day, as you scrape off everything that is left of that skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply this skin again with Egyptian ointment several times and subsequently if needed, knowing that there should be no residue of that skin layer; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains fatty lumps, then you should incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In a cross-shaped section, make an incision between the two edges of the section and cut it through from all directions, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic that contains this.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you encounter resistance due to pain, then do as I instructed you at the beginning.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly do this for the absorbed abscess in terms of section and care according to what we have said; and the section about an absorbed abscess is minor pus, which contains little sweat.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these abscesses are particular to this kind which occur in the head in certain men who do not have moisture; this cause is that I had to incise on an abscess at the head of a woman and drain it like a deaf lump, hard and white, which could not be sucked out, and if there was any struck on that, it would swell.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And for other abscesses that occur in the head in this manner is not contained in this chapter, like those abscesses that come from the ears of children, and you have their reasons for having ear infections, but the section of all these is superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the puncturing of those from the lower part of their pus for so that it may be relieved of the body in the parts below the pus.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those with what is suitable for its healing process.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Regarding the section of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses are formed by these scrofula lumps in the neck and axillae, and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are these lumps formed between them; and all of this scrofula is within its own tunic like so, as well as with knots and abscesses on the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofula are lumps; some of them are cold, and others contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So in that one where you have good position in the Touchment, whose color is similar to the color of the neck and responds everywhere, does not stick to any nerves of the neck or veins, nor has any pain, then you should incise that with dry superficial cutting from above to below relative to your position between the line G and the line B on the neck line; cut it through from all sides, and spread both edges of the neck as much as you can or as much as oil ointment if you need those, just like we have said about abscesses in the head, then extract that piece by piece.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And more caution than to pierce the vein or nerves.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the scalpel is not too sharp, that you do not cut your hand during surgery or relieve the patient's suffering, and that you refrain from cutting what is unnecessary; for if you were to pierce a vein or artery and had to stop in the midst of your operation, then apply some glassy plaster or other powders that still flow with sweat, strengthen the wound, and leave it as it is until the inflammation subsides and the wound becomes soothing and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sweat has ceased.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, continue with your operation while it is still within you.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And subsequently ask about the specific location of any cause among the other small scrofula lumps, therefore cut those and cleanse those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it's in the root of the scrofula large vein, cut here that you do not cut out that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before cutting where you are, make sure it's a fold of flesh that is firmly attached and leave that area so that the wound heals on its own.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And subsequently fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian balm, and then attend to that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out the whole scrofula lump, then make sure that you adjust both edges of the wound and drain as much pus as possible without leaving any unnecessary remainder.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you find that there is excess pus due to the size of the scrofula lump, make sure that you understand where to cut into it, then remove that lump and perform suturing as was discussed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas containing dampness, pierce that at the superficial opening where it appears at your location of the maturation of their area, and make a puncture at the bottom part where pus is secreted from the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And afterwards apply puncturing, you should dress it with balm and resemble those, so that it dissolves what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you find that the wound has already been cleansed, then treat it with balm of flesh-producing substances until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Title: 43
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Regarding the section of the abdomen in relation to a wound that occurred inside the gallbladder.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients divided this section into the appendix, and nobody in our land has seen that being done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the record of the speech about those things.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have a twist, make sure to avoid removing the appendix, as this is done only in cases of necessity where all the veins and major organs of the body are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have scabs in the mouth or gallbladder or both ears, when the illness is not in the tooth, use the section of the appendix to avoid the destruction which comes from perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	And when we want this, cut the appendix leaving three circles of the circles of the appendix, or four in a small section by width in that which is between two circles according to quantity, so that the section is circular not within the cartilage. This location is suitable for cutting as it lacks flesh and the sweat veins of its area are its own.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the surgeon is cautious, then here expand the edge of the gallbladder to where the tip points, and later make an incision into it until it reaches the duct, but avoid the blood vessels should you see any cause for concern.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And afterwards cut the spleen according to what we have prescribed; this signifies about the section of the duct by the swelling which is from that expanse towards this area and through the rupture of the belly.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time has passed in which puncturing is feared, add two layers of the edge of the wound's membrane, and ensure that this single layer is just the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards administer medicines that help produce flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	It is said by Albucasis that the main discourse about which we have discussed, namely, involves observing that some of these abscesses have already spread to the gallbladder area of the body, and the body has entered into death. The cause is inside the body, and others would cut into the epiglottis so that the body could breathe over the wound for a certain breath, thus saving them from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason we are commanded to keep the wound open until it consumes the malignity of the illness; and the malignancy of it lasts for three days; then afterwards we command thus on the wound and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen by my own experience is that a servant had a boil inside their gallbladder and cut out a part of the lung canal there, and I was called to treat them, and they did so in this way as they would for those who died, and uncovered the wound and treated the pus which was exuding from the small area of the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So I confessed that it had not cut a vein or artery, and the wind was coming from the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And nothing happened to the servant except possibly in their lungs, and after some days returned to improving their condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the region of the epididymes there should be no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the section concerning empyema which occurs outside of the groin and is called groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This empyema, named groin hernia, appears large according to the color of the body, and it is found in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And for the natural one, there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one occurs in two ways. One is similar to fatty lumps, and the other way is similar to empyema which results from blockage of an artery, and in that case there is fear (perhaps meaning concern or risk).
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not assume that it consists of iron with the patient, except for when it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should prepare that and investigate it according to this method. If you find something similar to fatty lumps, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then proceed to cut it in the same way as for nodes, and extract whatever content it has within the skin and evacuate; and if not, then thoroughly examine its entire structure, and treat the area with what promotes healing until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	About the section concerning the types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various kinds of nodes, and I have already mentioned all the kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And note that I will distinguish between a node and an abscess to avoid confusion.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that for abscesses there is heat and fever and severe pain within where the boiling of excess ceases; and when decomposition occurs, the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	For nodes, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and they contain a white pus which is specific to that organ.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it varies according to the color of the body, its onset is like a boil and proceeds in the same way as a stomach ache, whether larger or smaller, and they are divided into two types; either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture vary, as I explained in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So when you reach the treatment of nodes, extract it and inquire about it at its onset concerning the instrument which is called the intrument, according to how its form approaches this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for empyemas and all nodes; you should take hold of this instrument and insert it into the pus-containing moist area that you find in the empyema, and you will gradually move your fingers inside until you know that the instrument has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally place your hand according to the size of the empyema, and then extract the intrument; observe what is left behind in the place where it was.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture has drained away, regardless of its color, then you proceed to cut through the surface as I have said for other empyemas.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture left in the place where the instrument was inserted, then you will know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry off over it, according to this form for the cut area which resembles a cross:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Just as you have been taught, suspend it on a string, and scrape the membrane from all sides with ease. Save the skin or sac if possible over that, and extract that healing out of the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	And if it breaks during the operation, it's not possible to extract that healing. There are various views on this, and then you would remove it in pieces so that it does not tear due to any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	And if some or too much of it is torn, the node will return according to the best method.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that some small part of it was torn off, then complete the wound with some corrosive acute powders and strengthen the wound. Place over that which is a boil cautery, and treat the other parts of the treatment until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you should expose both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if there is pulsating vein on the opposite side, or not, then you should cover and heat that area where the tension is, which is the vessel and smooth that stretch for two days or three until the wound heals and stops the boiling of the blood; and then return to cut off what has hardened from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	About the necessary forms of the instrument in section and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Among those are the forms of the instruments, which are three kinds: some are large ones, others are medium-sized, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of a large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of a medium-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, bronze, or pointed ends cut appropriately, so that they pierce the empyemas.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experienced (doctors), which are called almond-shaped, and one of these is named red.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	They come in three varieties: large, medium-sized, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large experienced (doctor), this is its form:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized experienced (doctor), this is its form:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The method of experiencing pain, form of his/her:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Let's convey that they are through those apertures, exits, and cysts, abscesses, through which either the bones or other causes are involved.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They are made round, large, spherical like big needles with threads attached to them, and they are made of copper, iron, or silver. The best ones are those made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are made with black feather experiences which recall that in the cavities of those abscesses, reflections occur, that they are reflected by their lightness upon those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	They are of three kinds; some of which are long, and others of medium length, and the rest are short, according to the size of the lumen of the abscess and the constriction of the patient.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the medium-sized lead experience:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small lead experience:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are special motifs; among those there are some simple ones, which have only a curve, and they come in three types: large, few, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have metal hooks from them, and they come in three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those hooks have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And their ends have three curves, and they come in three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of them are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a simple large needle, its form:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple medium-sized needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a simple small needle, its form:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of an elongated large hook:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of an elongated medium-sized hook, its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of an elongated small hook, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large needle with two curves at the end.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a medium needle with two curves at the end.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small needle with two curves at the end.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of an elongated (large) needle with three curves at the end.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a medium needle with three curves at the end.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small needle with three curves at the end.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of knives used for severing and cauterizing nodes and abscesses, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those are sharp for the cuts that are made and the other ends are blunt, they are not used in such a manner but rather for making incisions during the cauterization of nodes with fear of lacerating veins or nerves. By doing this you heal the patient and find comfort to some degree due to the adjustment which is achieved by this method where one finds the excision of abscesses.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of needles, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small, just like thorns.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large needle point:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a medium needle point:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small needle point:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of copper and resemble reeds on which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the tip there is a punctured surface covered by grease and within it goes towards the divisions inside and outside, as you wish, just like you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which you hide among your fingers for puncturing abscesses and not feeling the discomfort of patients, they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of the suction devices by which the discharge from the blood is removed, and they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small. The forms of these:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of copper, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And know that these types of suction devices should be large, medium-sized, and small for when you need to quickly remove blood discharge in necessity, or when initially there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to remove blood everywhere in the body, and instead only use them on fatty areas. Like this, you would use them on fat pockets of breasts and thighs, on armpits and nipples, stomach and kidneys, and similarly for all fatty lumps.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some treatments are made using those instruments other small pieces resembling stitches according to this form; when blood is removed through phlebotomy or for the laceration of veins or arteries.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some treatments are done in round forms as follows:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Regarding the treatment of male breasts which are assembled by females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some treatments cause the breasts of certain males to swell like when their skin begins to soften in sleep. They are also swollen and assembled like female breasts, and far apart from each other.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for anyone who experiences this issue, note that you should cut those along the lunar section according to this form, from line B into line G. Then scrape off all roughness, apply medicine that hardens skin over the injury, adjust both edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it internally until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple descends to the parts and becomes softened by its magnitude in such a way as it does for women, then it is cut into two halves of pus in them, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each one being contained in the other of them, within which the major line contains the minor according to this form of .B. and .G. Then cleanse the channel that is between two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders necessary for the treatment until it heals completely.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the instruction for what to apply inside due to the distress of the patient and the flow of pus, then in this case when you treat the wound by submerging it in corrosive ointment and leave it there until the corrosion that is from the fat occurs, then afterwards heal it until it heals completely.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Regarding the perforation of abscesses that I have left to heal naturally.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that I have left to heal naturally are of the species of scrophulas, tumors, which contain a skin that is expelled.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture; and for those containing moisture, you should apply them to a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B.. And when all has been evacuated from the pus in the abscess, then fill it up with a paste on the second day and leave it inside another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards let the wound be covered and treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals completely.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of lymph nodes and scrophulas, then you should cut it in the same way as we have said in the section on scrophulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound spreads so that pus is present, then administer a cautery according to what we have already explained.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Regarding the section on abscesses that occur due to injury or vein rupture.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When a wound is ruptured and the channel that was above it has solidified, then abscesses occur. And the signs by which one can know whether inflammation or an abscess is due to an artery or a vein: if when the abscess is from the artery it is long and accumulates at the base of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, in it there is wheezing.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one that is from a vein manifests around the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if this kind of abscess is incorrect, especially in those with symptoms, in anginas, and around the neck, and in localized body masses; it's a large one, so you should avoid iron treatment for its cure, and the one in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	And for the one due to inflammation of the artery's opening, cut through the channel section longitudinally; then clamp the section with forceps and clamp the artery where it is exposed, removing the tunics that are revealed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then operate on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, strengthen the artery with double thread in two places, - which causes you to feel your strength during the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then pierce that spot which is between two ligaments up to the skin so that all pus in it is dissolved, and the abscess is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which the ligaments are weakened, causing them to fall apart; and afterwards heal that area with appropriate ointments until it heals completely.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to vein section, then you should have this at your disposal: holding the place of the abscess with your hand in relation to the channel; and then insert the needle into the spot where you held your hand on the abscess, make that penetrate; and there within you extract what comes out from the other side, and afterwards tie the abscess with a ligature according to what I have said to you at the vein of the grape in two parts along both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert a needle into that spot with your hand until all of the abscess is reached, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then dry the abscess in its middle until when you situate what is inside it, then you cut down the excess of the channel, and leave that which sticks out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over it the powder that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and afterwards administer the treatment which is done with cloths and ointments until it heals completely.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just like abscesses occur in arteries and veins, similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are injured during percussion or due to unnecessary treatment, alike.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the method is similar in places near the elbow or at the wrist, or anywhere where joints swell.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And this is an abscess that is heavy, and resembles the color of another part of the body, and is in the major parts of its disposition sites; when stretched under tension, one feels distress like a fainting sensation at the chest.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not added to the front of the chest, and by itself it leaves the chain, and it escapes in every direction and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	And about those who have it in joints, it should be treated with iron, which will strengthen them and lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One may apply the chain or steam on the head or forehead.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then one should apply it to the armpits and remove it from under the clothes.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a hook, and scrape it, and keep it there; and adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	End of chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Section on abscess which occurs due to eating that causes the stomach disorder.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Proceed to some diseases that occur in the stomachs of those and in other parts of the body of these, which are called fungal due to their similarity with fungi. The cause is subtle and the head of it is large; already the lips of these are involved, and they belong to those who are small, and they belong to those whose growth is magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one where in the stomach of that person there were two parts which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, except for their small cause.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these were inverted and would split, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I inserted those and extracted them in one weighing eighteen units. And the other weighed six units.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation during their extraction, consider if the patient is wet and if the color of the lesion is white, moist due to a subtle cause; then you should extract it from under the skin laterally, and with your presence apply heat to the fire, remove all the swollen areas that have affected this area; and if there is any pus, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you find the patient fearful and anxious, avoid extracting with iron; rather take a lead bullet recently made, strengthen that lesion, which is done in the way we have said; let it rest for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And adjust near the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large lead until it is removed and falls out on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the lesion is due to a large cause, then in its removal there is some fear and anxiety, especially if it's in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It's possible that you might remove most of its moisture, then proceed to cauterize it so that it doesn't return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And after that, treat it until the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to assume that you can extract parts of a black color, with little sensation, under careful examination, which one is simply cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come back to recall something close by.
Capitol .lii.	End of chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Section on the treatment of inguinal hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An inguinal hernia is caused by various reasons; or through fissures in the pubis which is above the stomach, and moves the tissue or intestine according to where they end in other ruptures; or due to pus that flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to constricted wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a fracture in the pubis and through the movement of the tissue, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and there are various pains, and it appears from different locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the escape of the intestine, then its location is like what we have recounted, with greater intensity diversity, and when you press on it with your fingers it disappears, and soon returns; and force you onto his stomach, and there is a magnified work that should be done.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If due to moisture, then it's visible and doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it increase.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if due to pus, then these signs appear showing the abscess turning black and decaying.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it's due to flesh nothing, then it's a heavy, large, hard abscess, and is formed according to an amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's due to wind, then the feeling of the body is evident.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is to consider if the inguinal prominence is due to arterial or venous pus, or wind; thus you must refrain from treating it, because there is fear and anxiety as we have taught in the chapter where I said about abscesses by artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the inguinal prominence is due to the intestine or the tissue, you must command the body that has its own will, and stands extended; then try within the circumference of the entire umbilicus, and command it to stand in your favor between your hands on both sides, and also surround it laterally in the circumference around the location where you have tried with your fingers; then extend most of the abscess upwards by units large; and after that lie down inside the circumference with strong or gentle lead bullet or powder, following the method of applying it properly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And after that, cut the middle of the extended abscess over the muscle and insert your fingers into that area to pull out the intestine; and if you have found it or guarded by the muscle, then do it now and push the intestine into the inner parts of the stomach.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the thread, then take it with a needle; and cut off the excess of him.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it is against your artery or vein, then surround that motion, and proceed with your operation; take two needles and enter them into those two strong points, then insert the needles into the created circuit around the abscess in a criss-cross manner, making sure they penetrate deeply. Then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, hold the needles and lay out the area where you will stretch the skin and let it fall on its own; or cut that when it is tender and place something there, then take care of the one with which the ointment covers in such a way that it becomes healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the bulge of the navel is made of flesh or due to dampness, then cut out the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or dampness, which you find in it, and then take care of what covers and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Title 53.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of scabies.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already stated in the division of various types of scabies and how these are treated with medicines, that treatment with iron is avoided unless the scabies has not progressed to ulceration. We have also discussed scabies caused by pregnancy and caution during its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And it was said by the ancients that some scabies lesions can occur in areas where eradication is possible, such as on the head, which occurs around the nipples or thighs and resembles patches distributed across the limbs to remove all of it, especially when they start small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	And when it is old and severe, do not try to touch it, because I cannot heal him of that without me seeing another or hearing of its cure.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on you is like what we have said, it means that you prepare beforehand and let the patient rest and purge them of black bile some times, then proceed to cut out any visible swellings, if found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for surgery in the preparation stage before the operation, and take precautions when using the surgical knife near that area; and carefully hollow out from all sides a good incision to ensure there is no damage to any cause of his complaints.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the pus flow out, do not squeeze it lightly, press on the areas and wipe off the large pus with your hand or any tool that allows you to use the available tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if it causes you to feel that there is large pus and an obstruction of vein or artery, then apply the cautery inside until the flow of pus stops, and then take care of this with other treatments so that he becomes healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Title 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division of various types of dropsy caused by water, and the signs for each type. We also talked about how these are treated with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that one which is cured with iron is only the type caused by lead alone, and it should not be treated with iron for any other type like tympanicus or osteomyelitis, because this latter is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of dropsy called tympanicus with medicines and your treatment is not showing results, then consider that if the patient has already become debilitated or if there's another illness along with this dropsy like cough or abdominal pain, similar to these conditions. In such cases, don't treat it with iron as it might cause fear in this regard.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you find the patient is suffering from excessive vigor and in them there's no other illness just dropsy alone, neither pregnancy nor old age. Then the way of surgery for this is that you lift the patient between your hands, treat him accordingly by pressing his abdomen with your hand, push out water to the side opposite to where it enters through the anus, take a thorn shaped instrument according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be made of two sharp parts, long like a thorn; but it must be small and gradually decrease towards the tip, such that in the operation you don't penetrate into the intestine and gently remove it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the origin of dropsy is from within the intestines, in which case cut out the section starting three finger widths below the navel towards the sides, on the right side of the patient above the anus.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the origin of dropsy is due to illness in the stomach, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three finger widths.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the origin of the patient is due to milk, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And don't let your section be near where you want the patient to vomit, so that the excess does not flow towards that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the instrument through the entire canal, and insert it into that section. Lift your hand with the thorn between the canal and anus, and scrape it out; if the amount is similar to one fingernail or approximately so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the anus so that the thorn reaches the desired location, which is where water accumulates.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then remove it and insert a tool with this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a slender silver tube; it is made of silver or copper or stag horn, in which at the lower part of it there is a small groove, and on its sides are three grooves: two from one side and one from the other side; and its end is cut according to the way of a feather, as often times.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the end of it there is an armilla, which when the tool enters the water, immediately rests on the tool, therefore evacuates a moderate amount of water halfway through. If you evacuate more from this than within half an hour, weaken the patient by dissolving their animal spirit, or you may cause them to faint as death becomes imminent.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate from this according to the virtue's quantity of the person and according to what you interpret from the patient's disposition regarding the virtue's significance, as well as their goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument, and collect the water which causes this, as it is held back by the constriction which holds that groove which you have on its belly, and when you collect this you understand to perforate according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then move the instrument to the other day if you find that the patient tolerates this, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and guard against error not allowing much water to be released from it.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then treat that as a burial in hot sand, sweat in the bath, and wait under the sun for a long time; and treat that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply the cautery on the stomach, and prepare the mixture close to the water extraction, as I have recounted in what has preceded this.
Capitol .lv.	Capital.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the treatment of children who are born with undeveloped urinary openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the child's passage from their mother's womb does not have a puncture in its head, or is straightened out and not in its proper place.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it is necessary to quickly puncture the child as soon as it is born with a subtle needle according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then insert into the groove a slender leaden pin and bind it there, and keep this for three days or up to four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it wants to urinate, let it relieve itself and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not remove the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes to the wrong place does not close this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Let that which is straightened by the pin be medicated with a leaden pin, as we have said, for too long a time within which it becomes enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Let those in whom the pin is not in its proper place be treated, which causes this because of these, the one who is born and whose penis pin is at the end of his genital organ so that he cannot urinate within himself; as it raises the penis with his hand to the upper parts; it does not affect his generation, for where the semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, it is a malady of a stuck position.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation on him is that the patient be laid on his back, and then extend the head of his genital organ with your left hand with a strong extraction, and cut at the tip of the head of his genital organ in its straight point, as it would be cut by a feather, or you do not leave any part, so that the middle of his body resembling the head of the penis falls into the middle place according to what he does.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be aware that in your surgical bleeding, what kinds of wounds may occur; pause it for him when you cut the wound, and treat the injury until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capital.65.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Regarding the white substance that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis, and the whitening and darkening and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Wounds may occur in this white substance on the penis, it is an indication of stuck flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, let it be hung on a slender one and cut that when all of it comes off; then apply it to that spot under the Egyptian balsam; and then there, treat it with transparent balm until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white substance is malignant, let its color be known; then it must be that you administer cautery near the cut and reason of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Let it be that if white substance is in the prepuce of the tip of the penis uncircumcised, and one part of the white substance is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside; then let it be that you remove the white substance which is inside at the beginning until it becomes consolidated; and then you treat the outside portion, when you treat this period the prepuce may not be shriveled.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And just as discoloration and corrosion occur in the genital organs and on the prepuce, then let it be that you remove everything that is already degraded and what wants to corrupt or is already corrupted; and then spread over that area a mixture of honey, which has been mixed with flour made from saffron, dill seed, and coriander.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure it along with another treatment that should be healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is an escape of pus, then apply a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The application of the lunar cautery is done in two positions at once; one when there is pus discharge and the other when the wound becomes infected.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed completely in the process, then dig that you should insert a lead tube into the interior of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in that which allows the foreskin to be retracted, and on it circumcision is not performed; and when an adhesion occurs due to infection or abscess) dig that you should scratch off the thick pus until it dissolves the membrane and the head of the penis is freed from every part.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those thoroughly, then dig that you should scratch off some of the foreskin and head of the penis, which explains why when the foreskin is thin and light, it is pierced slightly by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin thread; the latter is already washed in water so that it does not adhere to another part.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let the patient be treated with astringent until it has healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Section 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Section 57: On the development of children and on treating what may happen to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution like other infections: however, it's necessary due to our operation and will, and more so for children, we need to assign the best possible operation with fewer losses for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So I say that the ancients did not advocate circumcision in certain free zones, which they do not use in their laws, and it is only because of our experience that we have come to know the majority of craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and development on the prepuce and on testicles; they use tendons at the foreskin and incision on the nails.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these methods and did not find better development on foreskins, on tendons at the base that in development like nails, which allow escaping pus from above; the lining of the foreskin is made up of two layers, and there is a layer of pus left behind, which is easily punctured for another incision and a sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And for development which is done with a knife and manually, as blacksmiths do, it's not secure in cutting the tip of the male organ, as it easily enters into its groove.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation on nails, slightly you should use iron and ruin your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord is short by nature, and pus-filled vessels do not happen in such a way that it doesn't need development, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The development that is done with foreskins and tendons at the base, the benefit, I discovered through experience, that the foreskins have a proportionate incision; therefore, when you press your hand it has two sharpnesses, they cut according to comparison in one go; there's no mistake made throughout this process.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first method of operation is that you should have the child stand up considerably if he's one of those who are a little small, so don't do anything but tie the base at his penis only, and let him stay like that for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make the child comfortable in every way possible so he can understand this process when he receives his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make the child stand between your servants who are well arranged beforehand, and do not let them see more than one; hide the foreskins in your hand or leave them on your elbow so that the child doesn't see those nor any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into his penis and blow on the umbilical cord, pulling it until the head of the penis is free, and then develop that which is added to the one of pus.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then bind the marked spot at the base twice, and bind the lower part of that with the second tendon, and prepare to have your hand on the spot of the tendon left for good retention, cutting between two tendons.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then slightly lift the cord, and pull out the head of the penis; and gently squeeze pus little by little, as this is better; place powder on top and over the powder spread a cloth in which a poultice of hog oil cooked with water is spread; leave that there overnight; treat that with treatment until it's healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the foreskins for development, this is how it should be:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the first group be non-cut at their ends and the others be cut, so that they don't leave a stump of the keyring, and let the length of both sharpnesses be as long as twice the length of two pencils equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in development is that you easily remove the entire intrinsic cord or part of it, so you should make the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then ensure that you spread out that part of your hand on your thumb in front of the joint area and then puncture it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you can't hold it with your thumb, then extract that part with a needle and puncture it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days, and if there's swelling left from the joint, then let that bleed out for you until the pus cavity is soft, then scrape it out with ease, and puncture it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful at the tip of the joint, where we will not let him do this to you.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that with those powders which we have recommended in the section on powders of the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has been punctured from the bone to measure, and follows the divisions above, then you won't notice it for him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Regarding the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by pressure due to sand or gravel, or by swelling, or by obstruction, and it's similar to those that we have discussed about the methods of treatment in this section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and if there's retention of urine due to gravel which is already in the neck of the bladder, then you should have the patient lie on their side.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then have the patient place their feet on their back and spread out their belly from the part that's above their hips, and the patient should tighten their buttocks as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	And then the neck of the bladder is strengthened causing the gravel to be expelled towards the back parts, so that the urine is freed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as we have said, and he needs to forcefully remove the cause from him, then you should make a catheterization of him with an instrument which they call syringe, which has this form: It's made of silver and its thin like a lion's mane, just like a needle from ausel's artery with the thinness of a long ray that resembles half the length of a palm, and it has a thin tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of expelling urine through that is: take the curved penis and bind it with wool or string for a good grip; then insert the ends of the penis into the part closest to the syringe, and cut off any excess from the wool if necessary, but make sure it enters the cannula forcefully. And then pull the syringe inwards and towards your body.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie over their stomach, and wash the bladder and the genital area with thyme oil, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then bring the syringe with ease into the genital area; and bend the penis upwards above the umbilical part; and push the syringe inside; and push that in until it reaches the bladder; and make sure the penis reaches the cause of the blockage, and do not do so according to this order, but where there is twisting.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the penis with small wool pieces gradually, as the urine moistens the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and perform the urine treatment, use a catheter, do not stop doing this and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with vinegar and similar instruments that are compatible with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or pus in the bladder, or gravel within it, or if you want to distill water and medicines inside, then this must be done with an instrument called a clamp-curette, and here is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And where the tip of it is closed, there should also be a tip.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that, there are three prongs: two on one side, as you see.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In its beginning is a concave place, there where you insert it, and according to the quantity that presses against this, it adds, within which when any cause is pulled by this moisture, it's pulled out, and when it's expelled from it, then it's pulled out too, and when it's expelled long, as if by a clamp-curette with which naphtha is poured in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	And if you want to stop this moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp-curette into the moisture, and pull what is pushed out towards the higher parts, where the moisture is pulled off by the curvature of the clamp-curette.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clamp-curette into the genital area as we have recommended in the catheter; and then pull out the moisture with what you're pulling out, for that moisture goes to the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle catheter by which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or copper, where the tip resembles a small feather and let its shaft be smooth internally.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then hold the bladder in movement, pause there the moisture you want to irrigate in the bladder, and hold that between two with strong ligature around the double penis, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the catheter in the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder in the wetness at the point where·the patient's body bends, because that moisture has already penetrated the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have the bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make it at that circle; and pierce it all around its curvature; and then insert a strong needle into those cuts, even when they are turned; and then add the circle in such a way that it is also added naturally, because you place where you want from the moisture, rinse and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you hold that in the instrument and do it like you did with the bladder, spreading your hand into where the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	On extracting bile.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division of types of bile and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between bile produced in the gallbladder and bile produced in the bladder, as well as the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the bile for which my operation is performed, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the bile produced in the bladder is that which is formed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will explain that in a clear and abbreviated exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So it's said that bile produced in the larger bladder mostly goes to children; and the signs of this are that urine that leaves the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sediment; and the patient sweats their body, produces waxed lumps inside, and then is expelled through the anus with these lumps.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it takes a while for children to recover from this until they have reached the age of fourteen; and treatment is difficult in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it happens halfway through about that which exists among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of the one in which bile is greater and treatment is easier; If it's small, it's contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So how do we approach treating that, by starting with the initial stage of that which modifies the patient's body where it extracts all the passage which is in their intestines; where that opening prevents some lumps from preventing bile production.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then take the body of the patient on their feet and straighten them up by force so that bile descends to the bottom of the bladder or escapes from any lumps.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that hole between your hands which have been prepared, and let the things of you be left with these matters, so that the whole bladder is made to descend into the parts that are left.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then remove all of that and any other deformities.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the bile in the space, then you immediately cover it with a section over them.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not remove it all of your touch, then cover with oil the indication of your left hand thumb, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a full adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And remove all of the bile where it stands with your thumb.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that small amount into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your thumb, and expel that to the parts outside of the place where you have made the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant with their right hand to extend their legs towards the parts above, and with their other hand raise the pubis which is left by the legs in the part where the section was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the small end of this instrument, for this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And split in him that which is between the anus and the legs, not at the midpoint, before the right thigh; and make the section over that bile, your thumb being in the anus, the section should be transverse, so that the section outside is wide and inside compressed according to the amount of bile I can remove for his possibility, but not excessively. And if we press our thumb which is in the anus on the bile, it must be at the level of the section, and becomes a hole-exempted from its faculties.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some bile which has an edge and borders, because its excretion is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And that one looks like a lion, it's round, and it causes a more difficult excretion for him.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is the one which has edges and borders, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not like that hole-exempted, then cover over it or strengthen over it in a decent way, the tip of which is like a file on which you strengthen over the bile and do not escape from him; or insert those of your tool with curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot strengthen over it, then widen that crack a little, and if you see bleeding, cut in firmly with vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if bile is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and proceed to cut over it; and then push a little close to that; and similarly do so if there are more than two lumps.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is severe body pain, then the ignorance is that you incise in that large area, which befalls the patient with one of two causes: or if they reside or lead to his continuous urination distillation, so that the place is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May assist in the expulsion of what is inside until it becomes exposed, or in the creation within the fracture where the edges are inside that extract that through pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with substances of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that piece of cloth immersed in oil and vinegar, or in ground oil and water, because the pus is to be absorbed by the dressing.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And place the patient on their back on their bed, and do not move the bandage on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been removed, wash the area with water and oil, and continue to treat it with clear ointment and with diabolicon ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If pus and corrosive appears in the wound, adjust it and make it corrode, and if that resembles so much as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and for him there is forbidden urine (and this is known by the release of blood with urine), then intervene with your advice in the wound and remove that blood, because if Roman causes the bladder to rupture from the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and against all kinds, with what you find suitable for him during his healing until he is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And observe throughout the entire healing period that you are in touch with all the areas and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is small and it's located in the middle of the testicles, and urine discharge is prohibited, then treat that with what I recommend before the area becomes larger; and this progress will be marked by this treatment which leads to healing; and already you have seen this, so you should use a perforating tool on the tip of which this is its shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Of triangular tip, sharp, implanted in rod.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take the needle, and hold it on that part of the testicles to leave the pain so it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the needle in the testicles, piercing with ease until the puncturing tool reaches that pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the puncturing tool with your hand in that small pain, and you puncture the opening of it until it reaches on the other side; so urine is released immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is hardened by the pain of the part behind the testicles, because that is broken, and it's open through urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment does not suit any reason which prohibits that one, then leave a needle by the pain, and another needle above the pain.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut over the pain in that testicle between two stitches.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the bandage and change the frozen blood, which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	There is not necessarily a needle left on the pain, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other needle above only if; when this is removed, the needle nears the end of the pain, the cause returns to its place and takes over the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary when you have the needle above that you raise the cause to those parts above, or that it should return in your favor, and take over the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol. lxvi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Extraction of pain from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in women is less frequent.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see pain in any of those cases, then healing for them is difficult, and it is prohibited by manual methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman's force lies with her uterus.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you don't find a woman who knows how to express herself to doctors when she is pregnant, or if she has had abortions before.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you don't find women who know this art, especially the operation by hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section near the pain in women is distant from the location of the pain, so you need to anticipate with the section, and there it's fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If necessity compels you to this, then take that you have a woman doctor who knows and is available.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking that one, then consult with the closest doctor or someone subtle, or present a female midwife who is proficient in women's affairs, or a woman who has part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that presentation, and command her to do everything you ask her, from inquiring about the pain to beginning; which reason is that she should observe if the woman has a uterus, then instruct what you said in the buttock of her and desire the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds that, make her continue with what you said, and then command her to incise on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not a case of verge (possible reference to female reproductive issues), then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's abdomen and inquire about the pain. Since she places her left hand on the bladder, she should compress that area well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If she finds that, then guide her to gradually remove that compression from the opening of the bladder to the parts left at some distance within the power of her virtue, so that it reaches into the depth of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And guide the treatment on that location at the tip of the patient's abdominal cavity; you must reach into the depth of any part where they are standing and center the pain in that spot, so the complaint is not worsened by the pain as they move them.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be minimal at commencement; then guide her to insert her hand into that area. If she feels pain, adjust the position of the area according to the quantity that you know will alleviate the pain from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the stones of pain are lumps: those among them are few and large, sharp and rough, long and round, with edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And therefore, know how many stones there are of you for this, so that you can discuss about what you want regarding this.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to release the tension, adjust in the place where the cut is made and let it out for an hour until the pain disappears, then proceed with your operation once the pain has subsided.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the tools that are mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so you can be assisted by those during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to release the tension, and you know that the expulsion of the tension is from the artery that is cut, then you sprinkle powder over the area and strengthen it with powdered herbs and stricture descent, do not overdo this; let the pain remain and do not remove it, as the patient's condition will improve.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And once the intensity of the pain subsides after a few days, and the wound heals, then you can proceed with your operation once the pain has subsided.
Capitol lxii.	Capítulo LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white testicle, which contains the sperm and is referred to as the testicle. It's named the testicle.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it occurs in the proper sack where nature provided the place for semen production, once it opens that already has another semen; and it's the passage of the reproductive system between the white testicle which we have mentioned, not this but a small opening.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia occurs due to weakness affecting the reproductive organs, so it inundates this matter onto them. Sometimes it happens through hits that are made on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors; the color of it might become yellowish or blood red, or reddish, or blackish paste-like, or watery white, and this is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one can know where this water accumulation is located in this case: if it's within the testicle that we mentioned, then the swelling will be round and somewhat elongated like the shape of a testicle, and the testicle becomes visible, as moisture encompasses all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is within the proper sac, then the swelling will be round at the part of semen production, and that's why we judge there is another semen.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the passage of reproductive organs and the white testicle, then you'll find that it's centered.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then you expose the color of the moisture inside the swelling by pressing into it; and according to where it stands in the mark left by pressing, judge about what is inside them.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And when we come to treating them, then guide that if possible, the patient urinate and let their body fill up.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And afterwards have them lie on their back for some minutes or another reason, and place your hand under their wet towels.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And afterwards sit on the left side of them, and command the assistant to follow them on their right, who extends their hand between both sides up to the passage of reproductive organs and the part of the belly button.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And afterwards take the left side, separate the passage of reproductive organs from the middle point longitudinally up to near the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to rectitude, equidistant from the line that should be of the testicle's skin, so it reaches into the white testicle including.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that area, observe and watch for this to ensure you don't scrape too deep; your scraping should come down as far as the testicle's tip more precisely examine during your scraping according to the amount that is possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And afterwards puncture the white part filled with water through a wide incision and remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And afterwards separate between the two labia of the section with scissors, and extend the white part up to the higher parts; do not touch the passage within the reproductive organs, and cut into the white in this manner that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And inside him you examine all or in pieces, and especially his fine left side, for if you do not examine the operation meticulously, it is uncertain that the fluid will return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the patient needs to continue this process outside of his body during your operation, when you have completed the section of the catheter, go back inside him and adjust both ends of the canal's opening for the genitals with suturing, and treat that wound like any other injury until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the patient is affected by other illnesses, then cut the vessels which are above the retractor, and remove the patient, and afterwards treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the fluid is added in two parts, then you know there are hernias; therefore, dissect that part as you did with the other equally; and if it seems to your eyes to be an operation, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you cleanse the wound, and between each section immerse wool in oil or rubbed oil; then place another piece of fabric that was immersed in vinegar and oil above it, and spread this over both genitals and the belly; pause with sheets folded under and powders, and lie those beneath him according to this shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And place them side by side on the two sheets and fill them with moistened wool according to this resemblance; have their ends placed where they are pressed either from a table or a wet piece of wool, attach them at the waistband's structure in the drawers, one end take into the backside between the buttocks and the other end another to the foot of the trousers, two ends above the thighs on two knees and two ends again others over two hips, and all tension should be adjusted at the waistband of the drawers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases where this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of section with iron; and you take a fine surgical blade to dissect the canal for the genitals, and it should be ignited according to what we have advised that the white part containing fluid is exposed, and then you apply the cautery like this:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that canal, and it should be ignited while all the moisture is evacuated.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the catheter with forceps, scrape with forceps, and scrape with a fine burning cautery; dissect it according to what is possible so as to remove all of it; and protect yourself from the patient that the fire does not touch him.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and farther from the wound discharge than with section, and better than operation through incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If during the operation or when applying cautery, or after wound discharge, you encounter any adverse effects, then consider what treatment would suit such an occurrence for your patient, and apply that healing method as it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is weak, and does not anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture according to what I advised you; and it's when we confirm that you should do so, through what we discussed about meanings, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And consider that you should raise the patient over an elevated surface, then puncture the abscess at the lowest part of him below the waist with a diagonal incision, and complete the puncture according to the length of his body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide so that all the fluid is drained away.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand on the site diagonally and smooth that area, so that the remaining fluid can drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And treat it internally as soon as the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If a complication occurs during the drainage of fluid at that time you puncture it: and this is not done unless because when white pannicol in the wound opening causes complications and prevents water discharge, then consider that you should place on the wound a tool with which fluid from dropsy is extracted, the shape of which must precede; or adjust within the wound pressure against an object that extracts water from dropsy.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the fluid returns, and it is somewhat stabilized around two months or about these; and when it is added, then puncture according to that method, so that the patient will pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	关于肉瘤疝的切开和治疗。
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And know that during the operation for this hernia, there is a fear of pernicious loss in the major positions; so from my perspective, it is better to let you pass and save yourself through that.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation for that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in the bodies where the genitals are combined, and this is done due to these causes: or by a sudden excess of pressure, which accumulates in the genitals, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of his body, and it does not appear in his pain, and this is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And softness indicates an inflamed abscess, whose color is dark, and it does not move in him.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And in some cases it is caused by inflammation of the vessels, and from that inflammation already perceived his memory, or due to inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	When it is due to artery inflammation, it is known by the spreading of the abscess when you press that area on your thumbs; and do not confuse when that touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	It is the one caused by vein inflammation that should not be diffused for any reason, you must press it with your thumbs.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this type of injury a section can be made and on the other muscles; so you cut into the tendon of the veins, and then press onto the parts above, extract that from the white belly, deliver the suspensorium of the vessels, tie them up, and cut the suspensorium pus as you deliver it from all sections of the foot part.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the foot is already on those muscle areas, then you should remove the foot and cut into that area.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to any reason of the belly, or between that which is in the joints, then you should remove all that adhesion and cut into it through a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	It is when it's a native formation of flesh in the area of the adhesion which is behind it, then you should cut all that is from him, and remove the foot as well, as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and afterwards treat that according to another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	关于疝气的治疗。
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess enveloped by some kind of a leaf-like sheath resembling a sprout, and it causes difficulty in exercising movements and walking on the thigh.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this thigh ailment, one should consider with caution what comes before it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, when they say operation in that as I did in the first instance.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And they say that when you make the thigh raise on an elevated surface; and then put the suspensorium of the testicles over the parts left; and place your hand where you are pressing with the thumbs against the belly which is pushed towards the groin; and have those other servants ready, and extend them with vigorous extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut through the broad surface diagonally across where the vessels are, exposing the vessels.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And afterwards cleanse all parts as we have said in removing arteries which are in the veins.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those an arrow with a double thread, tie that at the first point where you encounter life in the thigh region, and tie it again elsewhere at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut those at the middle point in a straight section according to the length of the body, and remove that which is aggregated from the liquid, rotten, and corrupted.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with the treatment for other wounds where you wish to be healed by what falls into the vessels which are of two kinds, not being harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If life occurs in all the bellies, then you should cut out or cut through the testicles if cutting them is what causes it to stop with respect to the vessels, for lack of nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and make them stand still or cause it not to be young again.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia happens through a section that occurs within the belly extending over the abdomen from parts of the abdominal wall, causing some of the intestines to escape into one of those sections.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture can be either from the belly or its removal, and these two types occur due to various reasons: impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting a heavy cause, or by some other reason.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this is that it occurs little by little over time when the belly causes gradual expansion. It does not occur suddenly and there's an abscess equal in size within the womb, as the belly squeezes out the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it happens due to a section in the belly; at the beginning there's a sudden onset of intense pain. There's an abscess that appears differently than the surrounding area near the abdominal wall; this is because the intestine moves inside and the body above the belly is pushed upwards.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes, there's an outward protrusion in the intestine along with the tissue, and this condition is called intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some occur due to wind, others move into the intestine's opening and get stuck there. This causes great pain in the thigh, while some develop into unpleasant and more intense pain especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In treating the symptoms of this thigh ailment, caution is advised because you should avoid causing bruising in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of operating on this is to command the thigh to return the hernia to its cavity with its hand inside its natural indentation if it returns towards itself, then wrap it around its neck between your hands and raise its legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then cut the string that joins the testicle tendon to the areas above, and cut the testicle tendon entirely along its length; and place two folds of the section incision according to what you need for opening the section among them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if it's the section according to the amount that you can possibly make a hole in that, let it be done.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And clean that area until the sack of the testicles is exposed, while revealing the white hard lump from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your hand into that place where it severs the testicle, where there is the white testicle, which is located in front of the penis, and between the testicles according to their position, and free yourself from that adhesion that is behind the penis.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then move your hand towards the testicle parts on the sides, and with this extend the white part of the penis using your left hand, and raise the penis to that side of the section; and command the surgeon to extend the penis upwards as you dissolve the adhesion behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And look closely with your fingers so that there is no cause for the hernia being enclosed in the hard white part.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause from him, then remove that towards the belly of the patient.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick filament of four threads, and insert it into the back side of the penis, which is below the testicle's tube, where it severs the section; and then pierce the ends that emerge from the filament inside, making sure to be at least two inches apart in manner of a cross; and bind them with some of these threads on any figure in a way resembling an X; and tie it to that penis we were speaking about which is located below the testicle's tube tightly by two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads, and tie those tightly inside to prevent any of the vessels that are supplying those from forming a cause so that no abscess occurs due to this.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another tight wrap according to the first wrap, three inches away from his waist; and between these two wraps, smooth out the area which is in front of the penis that is located below the testicle's tube, with the size of the said thing, and cut through all the remaining tissue as if it were round, and hold off your hand from his penis.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then pierce the part in front of the testicle's tube by section where it flows with blood and health, as we have recommended in what we said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply oiled wool, and pause on the wound; and apply the thread (and some wraps of white tissue is burned, which we mentioned earlier regarding the incision of his urethra, where several wraps would burn those) and smooth out the thread so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If his healing is delayed, then immerse in water and pause on that as it falls according to what we said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another type of treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	Regarding ventral hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it is not observed that any has been burnt upon the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones would say that it is done as we have recommended in the hernia that is on the belly; which is to tie the vessels near the section towards that part with ease for him; and then dry out around the middle area in the vicinity of where I open that, within which the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Regarding the disorder that occurs in the intestines.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some threads may tear in the intestines as we have said, and lift the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not let any cause of hernias occur in the patient; and if they do, it's rare; and return them all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged with this, there will be an opening in the penis between where the hernia descends into the penis; and it happens due to the extension of the penis which is in the intestines as we have said, which cause is that the penis is extended, and then the area becomes swollen and inflamed and lifts.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of him is with a cautery as we previously described this.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some threads are treated with iron according to this manner: and that the patient lies on his two middle ones among your left hand, and then dry out the area of the wound opening from the swellings until it reaches the width up to three inches.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white penis that is below the tube so that it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the thread and place it on the most elevated part of the penis, and press it to the bottom of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then touch the two most prominent areas on the tip of the penis's thread, and adjust one of those to the other for suturing.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the thread, neither cut out all from the penis, nor extend the penis or any other cause like what I've come to know about in treating intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you pierce the threads, clean it up and restore the wound until it is consolidated; where the penis is contracted and not adjusting the swelling from the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, which is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of soothing the chain of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Pain felt in the chain of the testicles in some men is alleviated by heating, as it softens the tissues that are between those areas, and it requires monitoring for him.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who treats him in his recovery that he lie on his side according to his height, and unfold the entire chain that is softened over the natural chain; and close two lips against the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, as in the beginning, with an excess of the softened chain make three stitches or four and secure a tight suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the stitches; and proceed with treatment for other wounds until they are healed and the pus falls.
Capitol .lxix.	Section 69.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is condemned, but because it has been written to me that I remember this freely; and it is not necessary to remember this simply for two ways, of which one is when the doctor is questioned about this in science, that they know how to treat him who may occur; and the other way is that we have had the need for castration of other animals due to our offspring's illnesses, like with mares, and cows, and pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either through gelding, or through a rupture of the testicles.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	And in the case that it is done through gelding, the method of the operation is to make them slaughter the beast in deep water so that his testicles are softened and swollen, and hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand while they dissolve and do not appear the traces of the operation.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in castration done through rupture and sectioning, you should have the beast and press the chain of the testicles of him with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lay the suspensory and cut onto each hole where you make one section so that two holes process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those pus that you have removed from any wound.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave over any cause of the scrotum on the horse, but rather the subtle scrotum which is on the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better which is done through gelding, for it only leaves a slight cause of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Section 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs according to two ways: the first is when one appears with an expansion of the space in the chain of testicles, it's like a male chest that has female hair on which there are pubic hairs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flow from that one is in the chain of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in the case of women, it's a special one: that is, the male part on the pubis resembles two testicles in men, somewhat reduced in size and positioned to one side as if they were two prepuces in men with two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you should cut those adjusted tissues so that the discharge of that can escape, and then proceed to treat those with treatment for other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men who urinate there, which is in the chain of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for him.
Capitol .xxi.	Section 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of coughing and swollen flesh due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Severe coughing is adjusted to natural causes that are tightened and should be closely observed; some cases become exaggerated in certain women to such an extent that they spread like in men, penetrating into intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, when you have the excess of coughing with your hand or a spoon, cut it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not complete with cutting, especially at the beginning of digestion, because it does not allow for the flow of bile.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with treatment until the disease is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Undigested flesh is the flesh that does not enter the mother's womb and fills it up instead, and somewhat protrudes to one side according to the likeness of a cow (for this reason some initially called it "tail castration"); so when you cut like you would cut coughing, treat that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Section 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of diarrhea.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Diarrhea is when the male part of a woman isn't perforated or there's a small tear.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental refers to illness that has preceded, and such an accident is caused by improper body parts or by a subtle and thick disease.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it occurs in the womb region or in the patient's ribs, or in excess pus within them, or in pus below them. Prohibit coitus and prohibited pregnancies, and prohibit childbirth, and I strongly prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made through observation of the pulse, if the rise is visible, then it's high; more so if it's not visible, then you search for that near your own fingers or near the artery.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	More so if the rise is due to subtle disease, and it's close to the two lips, then you touch and release that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place your hands on the two lips of dust, and then place your index fingers under both breasts.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then extend both lips until that subtle disease is released and the rise becomes open.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And you take wool and dip it in oil, then place that on the affected area, and leave it there for a day to ensure that the incised site does not harden.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	More so if the disease is thick and dense, then you should incise that at a lymph node or at the leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	More so if it's due to inflammation, then you suspend that with a hook and incise that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop bleeding and reduce swelling like avocado, and dragon's blood, and resin, adjust with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a large lead tube for so that the wound does not heal lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that there for several days and administer lime water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then cure it with the other curative procedure until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents happen during the natural process of other organs, and then you should incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	More so if it's due to a bad abscess, an abscess that is in the womb should not be made against iron using any other method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment for hemorrhoids, uterine tumors, and red boils that occur in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the result of veins in the anus area that continuously exude blood; and as for old hemorrhoids, they happen like this.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already explained about the various types of those and their symptoms, as well as to which ones they are treated and which ones are not treated.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So it says that hemorrhoids and them, when in the womb region and do not show up through feeling, then in those there should be no treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	More those which are in the opening of the womb over which you can feel, these are the ones that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you should have the woman lie on her back and extend her hips or with a hard sheet, or with a rough cloth, then incise those at the axilla.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then apply the powders that contain the bleeding of one of the internal powders for reducing swelling, like avocado and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak her feet in water for an hour, and after that leave it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then have her drink a decoction of sumac and of mare's tail grasses and of wormwood and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take ground barley flour, mix it with honey and wine to add flavor, and make a poultice from that on her back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding stops, then it's good; otherwise, do it with two suction devices and on her nipples make incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in colostrum or in the juice of elderberry or in wormwood wine, to stick it on the area; and then treat that place with ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	More if it's of rough observation, then you should incise that which your appearance tells you according to what I explained about them.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitol 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the operation for accidental rupture of a sack in the womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses that occur in the womb, such as bad ones, abscesses due to pregnancy complications, ulcers, inflamed glands, ruptured tumors, hemorrhagic swellings, gangrene, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already explained these illnesses, their types, and their symptoms, as well as their treatments in the previous sections.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know that I mentioned in this treatise about the abscess caut where it comes from when it's related to healing abscesses, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron for it.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp on percussion and expectoration and fever, and sometimes it turns red and if you can feel it, then do not touch it with a perforation operation, but treat it with whatever helps during maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And at that time you should make the woman cut on a board with two edges; and lie on her side and adjust her feet to the lower part of the belly, and let her thighs spread out, and place her arms under her elbows, and tie them in a manner suitable for her convenience.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife should follow from the left side and administer the tool where she has opened the mother's orifice, the shape of which will come in those causes that will be done nearby.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this tool, fix it on the top of the mother's womb in the female patient, so that what enters from the tool does not exceed the mother's opening and guides the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the mother's opening, then you should sprinkle dust on the texture of the mother's opening so that it prevents any part of the instrument from entering entirely into the mother's opening.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should make the vertigo that moves in the tool on the left side and above, so that the minister holds the instrument and rotates the vertigo inside until it opens the mother's orifice.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then you should dry that which should be held at the head of them with a damp cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the fever is expelled, then you should place on the wound a cushion submerged in rubbed oil or yellow oil with some camphor; and let the calf rest in the section above the mother's opening.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And expose the mother, and over the navel, a clean wool cloth submerged in water where thyme has been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And let it be treated about two days with the ointment that suits, so that it becomes healthy within that time.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some sores are washed by the mother and the wound with water and honey that is stirred, and then water in which herbs or lime blossoms have been boiled, and then return to the application.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the swollen mother's womb, then you should refrain from treating it with iron, using instead the treatment that we have indicated in this section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to best medicate their patients when pregnancy deviates from a natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is essential for the midwife to understand the natural figure of childbirth by observing her patient's symptoms. When you notice a pregnant woman trying to expel her child through her natural passages and wanting to smell the air, this happens due to the process occurring within her body, hastening the birth process. If she is having contractions and the baby moves downward toward her pelvis or hangs below her navel from either side of it, you can deduce that this process follows a natural figure, with the baby moving down her body towards her abdomen.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you notice those signs, then understand that her abdomen is compressed by herself as the baby descends slightly heavier when it passes over her head. Let her perform the second stage, and eliminate any excess fluid for good recovery.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If this part is otherwise unnatural and unmanageable, when the baby sits on its feet and the body of the patient sits in front of her head and her feet, and one of her hands or under her foot. Or when her head sits and her hand is there or on her abdomen, and she is lightly turned onto her back, resembling figures that are unmanageable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be knowledgeable and discerning in all these matters, so as to avoid error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you every figure of those cases, and how the organs are in those cases for what they signify and their state.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is sitting on its head naturally by expulsion, and it is vigorous to the woman making childbirth difficult for her, and if the power of her labor has already weakened, then make her expel or have what women possess expelled from her, and evaporate her sweat with fennel oil baths and oily washes.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwife should intervene between her small intestine and anus in that second stage or dry that part with her finger within where there is moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the belly of the woman so that she expels the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not expel, then you should cause the woman to be rubbed with chaffs of poppy and fennel seeds.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And later command her, with a gentle persuasion, to be compressed and have her sneeze with a good disposition; and open her mouth and both nostrils for an hour, when the fetus will soon pass through.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the fetus are passed at the beginning, then you should gradually reduce those to facilitate small movements.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not heed the instrument, then have the woman lie on a board and raise her feet, and gradually move the board towards the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not being returned and labor has stopped, then insert those again and extract the membranes of the fetus or lay them out on the woman's hands with a cloth and extract it evenly; when that will be passed immediately.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	In the embryo's position on their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is in its feet-first position, then it should be guided towards this. And gradually make the fetus turn small, and adjust that, and take one foot and extend those slightly and gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When the baby is cramped in between the thighs, then you command it to expel, and make it sneeze with force, which if possible should be done through a natural opening if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not expelled through the method we have recommended, then you gradually return the fetus little by little inside, until you pause it according to a natural figure, which at that point should be naturally expelled through a slight position.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do all of what we have recommended, then take some bandages and dissolved rubber, beat them thoroughly in the mortar for good beating, and at that point line up the female's waist, under her belly button.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And gradually make it cut in tepid water, until it reaches the flanks.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you stop bleeding from your parts, then have it subfumigate with mint and place that under them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you've had the sub-fumigation for an hour, then have it sit on a stool, and at that point make it sneeze and extend its mouth, lift from there, and press the lowest part of its belly slightly, which should make the fetus naturally expelled soon.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Fetus' position on their buttocks and breasts.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus positions itself in this manner, then you gradually guide her breasts little by little; and have the woman lie on her back, and her feet pointed towards the sky, and let those be raised above the bed, and have her breasts fully spread.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually press on her little belly, and at that point extract what is left of her feet from the earlobes until they are prepared for the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not expelled, then take her feet and push them vigorously inward, and at that point press what is on the flanks little by little until the fetus can reach its parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually guide her breasts and adjust the fetus little by little, and command the woman to expel it until the fetus is expelled naturally.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Fetus' position hanging longitudinally from one of its breasts.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Guide it in the reduction of her hand, though if you can't reduce that, then raise the woman and let that go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it doesn't go, then have her lie on the bed, and shake her thighs with forceful shaking, and at that point administer to her medicines which I mentioned earlier of purges.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth has come, then have her sit on a stool, and at that point study about reducing the hand, and adjust the fetus according to natural figures, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself until it is expelled naturally.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Fetus' position on the back, spreading its breasts, and the surface of her body is two-thirds that of her mother's.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Make sure the midwife holds the fetus' hand and gradually rotate it little by little, so that it becomes easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when they are equal and after that you pause on the waist of her as we recommended using oil and purges.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And at that point you command her to push little by little, and when you've done this, then have her sit on a stool and command her to be leaning towards the right side of her stomach, and at that point you command her to compress herself; and make her sneeze with force.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Fetus exit after preparation from the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it proceeds from horror of the mother according to this method, consider this, and at that point you must apply the second one into your fingernail until the moisture is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over her face and neck, then you must apply that of the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and hangs.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And at that point guide the fetus to its parts inside so that you pause it according to what is felt, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and it should be expelled naturally through a slight position, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twin births happen naturally, and sometimes they occur three or four times, but this is unusual and rare; mostly these are due to natural causes, not living beings.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count them, whether they are multiply or a single, one by two, and distinguish those within the ligament at the umbilical of each of them. Some births happen naturally like one fetus through normal delivery, and others happen through impossible births as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some are difficult among them, you must give birth to them and proceed according to what we have said about the non-natural figures, then treat those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and makes what she does with ease and subtlety, and also with delay, and adjusts according to every figure as she was prepared by her method leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of what forms in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some lesions are formed in the major one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should verify that a female abortion does not produce any, and another of all forms, which is caused by the measurement of the noble sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is covered in the science of midwifery that suits it to that little resemblance to that, and thus adapts itself to that according as it covers.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol seventy-six.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Regarding the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for a dead fetus with what we have discussed in the division of medicine and it does not come out externally, then consider using operation by hand. You should judge whether the woman is of good health and not under any circumstances that are feared to result in loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And you should consider that the woman is laid on her side over the bed about her back, and that her head is inclined to one side and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should have that from both sides or be tied in bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you wet the mother's mouth of him with hot oil and with sweet honey and with fennel and seeds of it.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then oil the midwife's hand with those oils and honeycombs, and place her hand under comfort in the mother, and prepare on her hand the location where she will insert her fingers into the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Prepare conveniently in this way: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared that descending upon its head, and then you put your fingers into its heels, or at its neck, or at its mouth, or at the palate, or let him hang his beard, or at the cleft of it, or at the appropriate places on the back, or leave the hypochondriac.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the descent is upon its feet, then at the knee joint, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And you should have the finger of your right hand, and hold the curvature of it in that place which is between the last two digits of your left hand, and place your hand with ease and put the finger into one of those places that we said, until it reaches the root cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then hold and place another finger or the third if necessary, so that there is equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness merely.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be tender all around, so that the discomfort of it is relieved in this way as when digging out teeth for their removal.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And consider in this what is between them that the extension may be softened; and if any part of it is held back, then consider that the midwife should oil some of her fingers with oil and insert these expertly and turn those that are held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the fingers should be moved into a location that is more pus; and do this until all the fetus is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is inside facing the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by squeezing it, then consider having a sheet enveloped over that; and proceed to remove that until all is expelled, and cut it or at the joint of the hand or on the side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this for the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or encounters squeezing in the passage, or it is that water is cramped at its head, then consider inserting between your fingers a thorn and open the head and expel the water, or search for that with an instrument which is called "the plumb", whose shape will come close to the shapes of other instruments in this chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do this if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then consider cutting that with string or take that with plumb as we said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is inside and squeezed at the cleft, then it should be opened so that the wetness in the feet can be dissolved.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated, nor obstructed by squeezing, then consider cutting the head as soon as that suits you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the stomach organs are ruptured or in its hydrocele, then consider that you punctures it where there is wetness within it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the fetus is above its feet, then consider that the pressure on it is slight and the direction of it to the mother's mouth is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it is squeezed at the belly and feet, then consider that you remove it with cloth which will envelop your hand, and that you cut the belly and feet where there flows what is in those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are still and turn the head, then consider that the midwife inserts her left hand; if the mother's mouth has been opened, then insert your hand in the prepuce of the penis, and close it around the head, pull that with your fingers into the mother's mouth, and proceed to insert one or two fingers, and pull him with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is affected by an abscess and it happens to someone, then ensure that it does not get worse than it should; before that, later administer an infusion of wet fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages; and follow the patient with waters that soothe and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on his side, then if possible do it with stitches: and let that which we have said be applied to the living wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then immerse it in powders, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure there are no causes from within the second kind.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then apply what we have said about the treatment for abscesses caused by inflammation that happens in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is discharge of pus, then apply with收敛tive waters and proceed with the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman with a dead fetus in her womb, and another pregnancy was conceived on that spot, and the fetus that resulted was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to someone for a long time an abscess in their abdominal region; and it swelled inside until there was an opening, and it began to leak pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called upon to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied some strong-smelling plaster on him and submerged him in water for several days, then submerged him with another object; and I was too amazed to find that there was indeed a bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	And then I cleansed the wound, extracted bone flesh from him, and the woman was in her usual place positions, and already saw it in such a manner for a long time, corrected him by half a foot.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not object to being strange, but rather that in this is knowledge and help for what the surgeon does by his art in treating injuries.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	About the forms of the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of a rod by which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the forceps in which they are equalized, on which equalization two instruments are placed at the ends of two sticks.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this instrument should be made finer for twisting, and it may be made of metal or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of any stick is two inches and the edge of each stick is one inch wide; and the length of each is a hand and half. And in the middle part of the sticks are two adjustments for these metal sticks which are already made, of which the length is about a hand and a little more than an inch, and the thickness of each is two inches or a little less than that.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that when you rotate the two prescribed forceps, they open to those.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar but more delicate and light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of metal sticks or wood according to the appearance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the extremity of it are two additions like this, and the length of those additions is about a hand, and the thickness of each is two inches.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to use those to open the mother, then you have her lie down on her back with her feet hanging, and open that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the tool in such a way as to do it like scissors evenly according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth when she measures what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the forceps that were said by the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of a pusher which pushes the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of a midwife which contains the large head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end like this, and some are made long like forceps according to this form, like this, which has teeth like teeth of a scraper on which it is immersed and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of a midwife for few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of an instrument having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of an instrument having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps with closing teeth where the fetus's head is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a pliers having two ends, from which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two spoons lying side by side:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied by the species of them and they are prepared by the surgeons, according to their operation being lighter and more suitable for you, as well as considering their quantity in terms of people.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with those instruments anymore than you are supposed to be equipped with them, for the need of those is not justifiable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Regarding the extraction of the second kind:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second kind is retained you command it to remain, then make sure that your orders are given to the mother to keep her own child, and later perform that sneezing with conditions, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of it and on its nose, and if for this reason comes out, well done.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a spoon and make a puncture in the cover at one place, pause there and pour some boiling water into the mother's mouth, just like with remedies that are bitter, rough, anise, chamomile, scented with Arabic spices, cinnamon stick, and saffron.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the spoon, then place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place an ear syringe in the mother's mouth, let that be where evaporation occurs inside her thorax.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make that sneeze just as we have said, and the second one comes out forcefully at speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if this treatment works and doesn't worsen the situation, then you should instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in saffron oil or in pine tar emulsion, and place that under her chest where she should sneeze out a second time, and as soon as she does so, take it immediately piece by piece. If this is connected to the mother, then place your hand according to what we have recommended, and when she finds the second one, remove it gradually piece by piece according to correctness, making sure that the mother doesn't fall due to her own force of the action.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Afterwards cover where it has been loosened on both right and left ribs for ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust in the amount of suction so that she obeys and avoids adhering again.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended this treatment with sneezing and using a spoonful of herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	May if it is not relieved by all the causes we have recommended, then guard yourself that you do not fatigue in repetition of abstraction. Rather, cover what that which escaped from her goes to the woman's thigh and place a plaster with ointment and fourfold medicine; for this will soften it over several days, and will dissolve and be removed.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is placed, let there be an elevation of bad odor to the head and stomach, and this leads to the illness; then cover that fragrances should be administered under fumigations and suitable things for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Such as the ancient ones already use under fumigation of thyme and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	A form of tool for the instrument by which a woman is under fumigation should ensure the retention of menstruation and secondly:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made from reed or herb.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle end is placed under the chest and the broad end over the fire, and the fumigation is placed above the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that place where that fumigation is consumed and repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Regarding the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The child squirms and its anus does not open, which is too narrow and full.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to puncture it according to her instruction; and if not, puncture it with a sharp needle, and guard that it does not touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And apply over that wool soaked in vinegar and oil; and then treat it with ointment so that it remains moist.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it is full, then place an ear syringe for a few days through the child's nose, and leave it when the child wants to drink.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it can happen that the anus becomes full due to consolidation of pus or abscesses; then cover that this consolidation should be drained, and treat it with what we have said about treatment and lead (as a metaphor for medical practices).
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the treatment of the fistulas that cause leakage.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the anus cause lower inflammation and roughness, which occur near or on the outside of the anus.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or lumps.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that inflammation is old and drained of white or yellowish moisture, and some cases involve these fistulas penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those penetrating are known by what escapes from them during their release and due to windiness; some of these cause the mother discomfort with their release, and forcefully escape from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are found in the space penetrating into the bladder and into the belly muscle; and some of them penetrate into the junction of the thigh and into the opening of the vagina.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And for the kind of penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, you should insert your finger in the anus, and place a subtle tip of reed or iron in the fistula when there is no obstruction.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is obstruction in that, then insert a subtle lead or horse hair tip into it where you feel the thread or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all nor does any cause of elimination or worm or windiness proceed as we have said, then know it is not penetrating, and so take care with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the belly muscle, then its meaning is that this urine escapes from it and prevents that in this place where medical intervention should be consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	When pain penetrates into the joint or into the bone and is felt in the circulation, then there are signs that indicate that it has invaded this area. If within the bone there is not a tumorous growth causing pain in the circulation of the joint; if it causes continuous pain for a long time; and if it is not healed with medication, nor does it harden under grease.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas penetrating inside, the cure is not complete for everything, and the cure of those requires labor and dexterity on the part of surgeons under which they are performed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And for the one that is not penetrating and is not old, recovery through iron is awaited as you are about to hear from my report, and what I already have and testify.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that when the patient lies between your hands under him, raise his servants inside their areas; if the thighs are inclined towards the patient's belly, then insert a lead or an ember into the area, or in case of the gouty fistula, find where the disease penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that is the patient around the collarbone, then you should insert your designated position in the collarbone.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your designated position that the disease has already penetrated on its own and been discovered, or if what you feel is between your designated position and that siphon or flesh, then you will certainly know that this one penetrates; and from there do not work on it, because it is not within it to heal, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say that it can be cured in certain people.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And regarding the treatment for which young hope is placed in you, it's that you apply subtle fire according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert this lit flame into the fistula near the collarbone; then repeatedly do this two or three times until you know that all those fleshly parts adjusted by fistulization resemble a feather from a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with ointments wrapped in bandages until all those fleshly parts are healed. And also treat it with medicines for the affected flesh and its consolidation, and if it is healed, it's good; otherwise, then it is not healed within a certain time period for other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the disease enters and does not penetrate into your designated position which is in the buttocks, and between that and the disease that is slowly spreading flesh or siphon, and places the fistula where it seizes the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula. And you see if it dries out on the disease, and within the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the disease penetrates, and through the disease is freed and heals.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulized flesh parts which resemble a feather from a bird, and do not damage any of them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if there is a discharge of pus that comes between you and your operation when touching those tissues, then let it be like that, and with the slightest instrument burn it with fire or with acute medicine; and burning it with fire adjusts good habits: this is healing of those adjusted tissues, and elimination of pus from the excess moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with bandages wrapped around or in thick cloth until the place becomes warm. Then subsequently cure the wound with ointment on hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in medicines where there is restriction and discharge; once this happens, it has been restored and is healed, and you do not fear reoccurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from your patient's body surface, then insert your designated position in the anus and inquire about that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you find the disease and between you and it is slowly spreading flesh or flesh, and it is approaching penetration, then this is not an operation in him but according to hope and belief.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This problem can be addressed in three ways: or you can cauterize it as we have said; or dry out that area until you achieve the patient's cavity so that you are able to insert those and discharge is possible; and do not burn from the drying to avoid entering the tear containing the anus, and you act over the buttocks according to your desire; and then proceed with drying over the patient as previously mentioned, or on disease or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those fistulized tissues that are in the cavity where you can through scraping; and strive to restore the entire wound by drying, and if pus is still not consolidated above it and continues to leak from the opened fistula at the entrance of the anus, and a little pus leaks over the buttocks.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is completed in this manner: when you introduce the disease into the fistula, and near the anus within the skin towards the buttocks, around the entrance of the anus, then it takes on the characteristic of an perforating extremity, as if a needle was used to puncture wounds in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And intervene in that layer enveloped by many veins or around those; and then intervene, trying to enter with the vein into the fistula within which it achieves its own cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it penetrates into the edge of the testis near inside, then you remove the vein from that tendon so that you insert your fingers in the anus; and extract the end of the vein and adjust both ends at once, strengthen each one, and let it rest for a day or two, and as much as the vein penetrates into the flesh, strengthen there where those parts are cut by the veins which lie between the two ends of the vein and fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then have that penetrate in any way you prepare, as long as it is moving in the preon, which means that you do not make this for fear of piercing the membrane; and then let it heal inside where it needs to be healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spiked object that is used for the cut fistula: the curvature of which becomes sharp on one side and not-sharp on the other, so as not to pierce unnecessarily what isn't necessary, just like sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing of hemorrhoids where there is bleeding in the process of that.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, or they resemble the buttocks like charcoal, or they might be similar to raisin fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those they are small and large, and the bleeding from those happens at times and it is one, and they are spots, and they are in the anus, and at the ends of that.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are in the anus follow fewer moist days, of which they have yellow water or a little blood within continuous pain, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to squat and express until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear under your hands.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you squeeze with your fingers or whatever you have under your nails, and you press the veins that belong to it.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the nails are not held in these by their moisture and softness of them, then take them with a stiff cloth or with leather or woolen cloth, and remove them with your fingers, and press these towards each other, sprinkle some powdered remedies near the cut for there to be no cautery upon them; or cauterize these according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with the other remedies until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not allow for excretion, then guide the patient with a spoon in the mouth where there is a small bite, and wash them with that water which is in the anus that facilitates excretion somewhat when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and you should take them with your fingers, or take them with a knife, cut them, and then treat those with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And when you have made the cut, consider that you should administer suturing them according to this method: take a bandaged vein and insert it into the needle, then extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, and have it penetrate through the needle in the edge of the other part, and wrap both ends of the vein around the part leaving off with the needle; and laterally. And strengthen the hemorrhoid by stretching its structure firmly, and then pinch the vein and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leave one without tying it, for fear that the excess blood may flow from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in oil rubbed or in wadding; and place that under the buttocks, and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that heal where it lies; and when the pain subsides, treat those with balm or with another remedy until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Moles that are observed occur due to the excision of a slit or due to constriction in nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and do not heal in that medicine, then consider that you should prick those with the tip of a spike or with your finger where they become moistened and there is pus over them, which prevents their healing; and then treat those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should drain those with much pus, the first when bleeding occurs and they are scratched; and then treat those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Regarding the treatment of abscesses, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that abominably, this is the key, and not if but notices a roundness resembling a button of a needle throughout the body and mostly in the parts left behind such as the legs and hands, and you should avoid movements because of those pains.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then consider that it should penetrate what is in the channel of the needle, and be kept with forceps or with a knife, and removed from its edge; and then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize it according to what is provided in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	The first sentence translates to: "Warts are small, bumpy, sharp, round ulcers on the surface of the body, and warty spots appear on the children's cheeks."
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The translation for this sentence is: "And the treatment for that involves spreading and incising that part of it, or if it is a thick paste you apply it as a paste inside the cavity where it is placed."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	The translation for this sentence is: "And if you want, burn that (referring to gout or another condition), as we said earlier, with fire or with acute medicine."
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	The translation for this sentence is: "And now both the opposite and non-opposite ones are eliminated using the tool I directed."
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	The translation for this sentence is: "Warts are small, furry or pitted large lesions on the body surface, and when it touches that (a wart), it feels like being bitten by an ant to the person, and it grows around the body."
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The translation for this sentence is: "And the cure for that involves taking a needle of copper or iron, it must be strong, place that over the ant until its body fits inside the circle of your needle; then move your hand towards the needle where you will incise it in the circuit of the ant, and place that near the base of the flesh, and eradicate the ant from its nest."
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with an iron needle or according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the needle be drawn with subtlety, silently (meaning it should not pierce through) and enveloped by something that makes its appearance as if shaved off and the rotation of that thing.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, burn the ant according to what was mentioned earlier in the burning of ethyl in the tip of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The meaning of this sentence is: "In terms of the tools that we use for administering criticism."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some burns are made with iron or copper or melted tin or hammered metal; some burns are made with those small and large tools according to which we use them. The smaller ones for the treatment of little children's burns, and the ones on whose buttocks the skin is loose or sore, the burns from those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large but few burns:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of your needle above where the pouch is tied should be broad according to this manner; and to its distance, wherever the pouch is tied there should be no exception.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of your pus, which intrudes into the anus, should be silent (meaning it shouldn't have an opening), moving in a subtle manner; and on one side of this part there are two prongs, and on the other side one prong, and the size of the prong according to the thickness of the rays and thicker ones being larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And make the pouch where you place medicines from the bladder of an animal or from sheepskin, and its location should be at your palm's length.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And make it pierced by two prongs like how they rotate; and the size of that space which is between these prongs should be as described.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those prongs a thick piece of raw lead that is as large as ten pieces, or approximately that size. Adjust the pouch to it; and when you place the pouch in this manner, straighten it within the tip of the burn between two distinguishing marks with strong constriction, and heat it on each prong: The quality of heating like that involves filling the pouch with medicine, which should be boiled according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; and remember not to make it too wet nor too dry.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And make the patient lie down on their back, elevate their limbs and place them under their body; then grease the extremity of the cautery with oil or with egg whites or with fenugreek or sesame paste; and insert that gently into the anus for ease. Then let the practitioner take the pouch and express its content forcefully in two turns until everything from the burn is emptied onto the intestine; then remove the burn and elevate their limbs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes vomiting, keep it as long as possible; and if you leave it on overnight for the whole night, it's better in youth.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you heat that in the stomach ailments and the vomiting of the patient lasts, then you should repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are bloody discharges or pus in the anus, then make the heat gentle and mild, like the heats for which children are treated.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Regarding the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already mentioned in the division of the treatment of the plagues what was suitable for the free (context could be referring to different treatments or practices), and I say this also about treating those with me and with medicines according to their compatibility.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So, I say that the plagues are diversified according to how they occur and also depending on the location where the plagues appear.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which spots on the body give rise to plagues are as follows: due to the damage of bones, or an incision in a wound or at a joint, or hitting with a weapon, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or diseases that lead to such spots.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The plagues that are on the parts of the body are as follows: such as a plague that appears on the head, or neck, or feet, or stomach, or breast, and so forth for other body parts.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some wounds for you to follow that reasoning and rule about other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the simple skin diseases, for the recall of compounded ones will come at the start of the next chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say that when it happens in the cap area for a simple skin disease and not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to gravel or something similar, and has only taken one dose of medicine just like this, making it a large wound and fearing about the patient developing an abscess, then you should puncture and make a small incision above; and do it immediately; and then extract until you reach the source according to the amount of its virtue if not any other cause prevents bloodletting, especially if the source that is coming out from the disease is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And for bloodletting in opposition to the affected part; and keep watch on the patient for filling up, for food, and for heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Or if there is any reason for preventing from the beginning, then reduce in food and do not approach to meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the disease, if it happens to you in an abscess, apply fat oil or in a drink where it is anti-inflammatory.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Or if you are sure of an abscess, then pause on the disease, if it is near to its source and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause on those ointments inside until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Or if the disease is large or due to ingrowing of nails and similar things, and it's not possible to adjust the lips through pins, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend about their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Or if the disease has already been discovered from bone and skin, but it's not retention of you but a small suspension, then incise that and properly treat the disease with medicines and restore flesh in place of medicine, and command the patient to eat meals containing roughness: cabbage and similar things for them, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find corruption in the medicine and doesn't stick to the bone, then you should incise that completely and remove it, and properly treat that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Or if in these diseases the flow of blood from an artery or vein can occur, and it's not separated by medicine, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that un-separated, then you should incise that with a sharp instrument, or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said doesn't coincide, then you should cauterize until the blood is separated.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these diseases are simple and small, then their cause is minor; let it be that you sprinkle this powder on them, which when consolidated before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of this powder is as follows: take one part oil of juniper, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts ashes; make it all thoroughly ground and sifted, then spread it over the wound until it's completely filled, and tighten well with good compression until it sticks on that, and coagulates with its own blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then scrape that above with powder and let it heal, and do not disturb it until such time as there's no abscess formed under it, when the medicine has worked inside until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes you do this alone with a cautery, when you don't have oil and dragon's blood available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is done in large diseases when it's necessary to apply that over them and stretch it out, for those recent diseases at their source, where the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it's in summer time, then it's not appropriate for this powder to be placed in its usual position, rather treat those with what we have said, so you apply some digested ointments on them, or place these powders of the flour of bread in water and honey until they form a paste; and properly treat those with another treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Or if it happens in the fracture disease of bone, and it's small, then you extract that through the flesh.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment for head fractures in cases where poisoning is involved.
De las plaguas del col.	And about diseases of the collar region.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Or if the disease happens in the neck area, then there's no difference in treatment compared to when it's simple in the head region.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Or if the neck nerve or artery has been incised, then when it's a nerve, there's not an opening but to avoid treatment that causes strong anti-inflammatory effects, such as garlic and substances similar to those which irritate the nerves and constrict them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And don't stop on the disease for any reason because the substance of nerves is fluid and its continuation is in the brain which is the root of all limbs.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is treated with lighter medicines, such as washing in double water, oil rubbed or non-rubbed, when it's washed with double water and the other minor sores according to this method, then with ointments moistened.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then you should perform suture or clamp the edges of the wound, and afterwards treat it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound is deep or encounters pus in its lower half below the skin, then puncture that at the deepest point of the affected area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If during the wound there has already been a cut to an artery and blood flow is established, then separate or dry that out, or bind it, or apply a cautery to that if need be.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have already cut into the tendons of the thigh or even fully, and the veins under the knee are saved, then you should adjust the edges of the wound for suturing over the artery without touching that; equalize it before doing so and return it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with firm stitches, and leave it for a few days; then treat it with ointments where there is congealing and excitement until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already made contact with bone, then puncture that. And if there are bone fragments in it, extract all those you can from them; and whatever is not healing properly, leave it to heal within the wound, until it turns pale, and make sure it is separated from the body so that it becomes lighter.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then apply the powder recommended over it.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If there is a fistula in the wound, then treat it with something whose memory will return to its head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the knee or of the thighs, when they occur between the shoulders and are made in the armpit or on the buttock or on the leg or on the thigh.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it's a wound from a lance or a bullet, and you measure the depth of it, then consider that if there is wind (indicating lung involvement) when the patient breathes; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the wound is recent in their blood, then you should place on him of the first hour's powder, and do not tighten that so as not to allow the blood to remain deep within him and return to his heart causing illness; but place on him an attractive ointment instead, and remove that twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then cover the wound opening with a cloth so that it absorbs what comes from moisture; and make the patient lie on the wound so that it flows away as is appropriate.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If it has been three days or more since the wound occurred and there are no convulsions or heart tremors, nor tightness in the abdomen for the patient, then consider that the wound is saved; and from that point on treat it with bandages and other good treatments until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the patient's recovery is not justified, and it has been open for all this time, then you should know that a fistula has already formed; therefore, treat it from its head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a cut from an artery or bullet, and it is simple on the surface of the leg or thigh, then treat it with what precedes suturing, if it's large, or with powder, if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already made contact with bone and you've already incised bones in him, then you should twist the wound and hold to extract those bones if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they're not separate, then leave them until the wound turns pale, and extraction of them becomes easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds that occur in other limbs, the treatment is like what we've discussed.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or somewhere in between.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	When it's large, some cuts involve the bowel or nerves of the bowel, so there should be a more forceful and subtle introduction to their (bowel) content and suturing process.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made more difficult by other means, and you know that the reduction of them is much harder; if you don't take care of their introduction to their place immediately after opening it will inflate, making the internal substance hard to handle.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And thus, the best disruption is in-between, where the reduction of the bowel isn't difficult, as it is with the other two types mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that suturing of the abdomen is according to four ways, yet two of these sutures are common and apply also in suturing of other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two others are specific for these treatments that also apply to other wounds, yet they are even more specialized in the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I advise you to have every exposure and declaration when it comes to your treatment and presentation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, say that when the wound is small and causes obstruction in it, making its reduction difficult, then this situation is with one of these two methods: either due to the minimization of the disruption as we have discussed, or when there's inflation on the bowel from the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when this happens, you should scrape the affected area that is submerged in a sponge wrung out with hot water, or what you take from water boiling, and cyperum, and spices, and immerse them there in the area of the hernia until the swelling resolves.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some applications made with this can be found in which it has an anti-inflammatory effect, and it is better than water alone in resolving swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And once the swelling has resolved, then you moisten the affected area with water in which garlic and chamomile are boiled, for this relaxes the internal organs to a certain degree.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is necessary to relax the internal organs with this treatment, then break up the disruption with a small instrument that has incisions.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is proper that it does not dry out, and there should not be activity to dry out close to necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, dry up its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of its sharp form, and the other part non-sharp, and the subtle tip, and do not make it as subtle as a needle, before it becomes blunt for a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and goes beyond the organ, you should make its reduction according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on that, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide, and it is in the lower section of the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back, place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper section of the belly, then you should place his head and feet higher than the sections left.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two sections of the belly, then you should keep your judgment and consideration at all times for that reason so that the section with the wound is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this to large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, use this as your preparation and ensure that the one who administers it is among your most experienced ones, which has all the disruption under their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and close to each other revealing some reason for another closure nearby.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common way of suturing: when you take the needle, or count it according to the amount of width of the wound; and let off from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle one, another that you do not put thread in both ends of the chain, at both ends of the ring where the chain is left inside, so that you make it penetrate through that section; and you have added both ends of the chain and both ends of the ring, and they are made into four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And further strengthen with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and some times from both parts at once, and then add the two lips and the wound by gradual addition; and let off the thickness of that finger and put another needle there, and join that with thread as you do with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary among the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be medium between hardness and subtlety, because the subtle needles barely cut the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult in the chain, therefore you should make them medium in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not make the needle fixed in both ends of the chain nearby each other, so that the flesh is barely cut and that the wound does not burst before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make prolonged stitches for the wound to be prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And further pierce the ends of the needles so they do not slip off from under the patient during sleep; place powdered substances over the stitches from all sections, which have the ends of the needles; let them remain until you know that the wound has already been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this method of suture with needles in a common manner is more suitable for small wounds, which until completion of the stitches may involve one or two needles around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with stitches all four ends, of the chain and both ends of the ring, in one go, with a needle where the thread is wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when on the needle you have penetrated these four ends, return the needle to that half section where you started, so that the thread from that part goes up to the wound, so that the stitch is according to a stitch of cloth where the fabrics are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the thickness of half the finger's length.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture I know by men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And by such a suture I healed the wound that happened to a man in his belly, which was hit with a stick, and it was the disruption of the wound larger than one palm's length, and it stuck around two palms' width from my organ and it was in the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I reduced that deposit once the organ had been removed for xiv hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the inflammation is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and heal that which is cured; and then apply the medicine for about three weeks, and it is transformed into its usual state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it was not healed; and by a miracle of fire, which I did not cure with ointment, which was in the place where the ointment could not be reached or any medicine either, but rubbed over the wound like old butter for two days and frequent washing with honey water inside that fire cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	I may tell you two kinds of my own suture techniques according to Paul's narrative.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you start with the suture of the thread, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside of the part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle penetrates into the thread and then inserts pins according to straightness and length of the entire body, lets the end of the suture stay in which you inserted the needle; and makes the needle penetrate into the other end of the part that is inside the part outside at the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And once you have made it penetrate like that, then make another hole in that middle part of the wound on this side compared to the other; let the end of the suture be where it is here, and make the needle penetrate into the other end of the wound on one side as opposed to the other.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the former penetration of your needle penetrate into the suture at the end of this thing which is in the part on him inside where all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this middle side and stitch that at the end which is on the suture on the other side, and remove the thread needle that penetrated, and then shorten it to that thread where the end of the suture is on this side of the wound; and remove that from the thread which is from him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make this once and again, and do this between another stitch so that you sew all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole of this method of suturing is that you sew on a suture made from skin when sewing the threads, so that you stitch the suture one time from the end part of the thread, and then let that other stitch remain until you have finished it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second kind of my own suture technique which Gaulia mentions is through discussion about it and as recommended by others, this involves sewing according to similarity on which some doctors sew, so they include every part up to its natural corresponding part; and apply the end of another from him and the end of the wound to the other end of him, and that is done according to what I advised you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And when you place the needle at the end of the wound near your own side compared to the outside part, make it penetrate into the inside part in that spot, and let go of two ends of the thread; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those in turn, and make each of them penetrate from the inside part into the outside part at two ends of the wound other than those on this side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common light sewing, and it is a suture that precedes memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is Gaulia's explanation.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And Gaulia would say thus: the suture of the abdomen is rectified with two needles, so you insert into these each a thread, and start with the needle that belongs to you, make it penetrate in between this other side according to the suture of those which sew bodies equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle location of the abdomen, then this suture is more difficult compared to other locations of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And Gaulia's method for treating wounds is judgment about the other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And this is the reason that when you catch the wound recently on its own mark before the air alters it, and return the intestine and stitch it up and properly fix it, then place over that powdered carnal.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then place over that some ointments which are at your disposal so that they harden and settle the threads, and be consolidated by suture; and then treat it similarly as in treating other wounds so that it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have these medicines at your disposal, then place over that immediately, because it starts to bleed like blood, like butter, and switch this twice a day as instructed by me, until it heals, whereupon you would not need any other medicine when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the wound might communicate with the main injuries, then cover that by soaking wolf's hair in oil of high quality, or in used oil, and place this between the elbows and keep it in contact with these areas.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in its intestines, where this many days pass by, then treat that with vinegar of black stinging nettle, and especially if the pus is developed within the intestine and causes passage penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one from the larger intestine is a lighter pus for healing than the one in the finer intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal the one that is called "gout" which does not respond to plague treatments; this is due to the large number of veins in it and the vastness they have there, as well as the subtlety of its nature and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Perhaps when dealing with the plague material is the fabric, and if you manage to get that recent one, return it according to your judgment along with which you reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Perhaps if it has spread to the patient's area and is now a rust or black color, then strengthen that at the root over the affected spot, so that fluids of sickness come out, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert another at that ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from your exit point where you left off with the plague area for you, so that the concern about it is alleviated by you, exerting force on the fabric and the emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it's small, then it is possible that healing can occur in some individuals. This is why I saw him being struck in his abdomen by a lance and he had gout from the right side of his stomach, and the gout was old and made a fistula, causing discomfort and flatulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	So I pursued the healing of him even though it was not confined in his treatment, but I sought to identify what was diseased and where the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I pointed out the consolidated place, observed over the place that experiences an accident of ill in his abdomen; and did not incur any other such accident and messed with his digestive system by eating and drinking, but instead took baths and exercised according to your instructions.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when dealing with gout in the intestine and it's small, then you should tie it according to this manner: You take large pieces of ash; then adjust the two edges of the gout and place one piece of ash that has an open mouth over the two edges of the gout; therefore, when it covers them and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of him, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another piece of ash next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with pieces of ash one after the other according to the amount of all the gout.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and get rid of the gout; crush those excess pieces in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient with discomfort.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine can be tied with this subtle material made from beast intestines which is stronger in thread; and you take the tip of these intestine threads, and if they are clean, then place the tip of them on another thread at your side, wrap around it, and then insert that thread into needles and substances for that particular intestine, and reduce that during the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this way of stitching with ash is merely according to paths of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Perhaps if the gout is large and wide, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, where then there's only a slight irritation rather than complete healing.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Regarding the treatment of wounds and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all gout and abscesses when they heal and become old, and make a ulcer, which is not consolidated and keeps up the arm continuously, and does not get resolved, then regardless of where it is in any body part, it's universally named as a fistula and we call that condition 'wound'.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a hardened, durable, white lesion that doesn't cause pain and which has the consistency of fear of being cut off; for this reason, certain roots, i.e. fear, are named in this way.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And there are some cases of it being wet, which causes pain; and much moisture is eliminated in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture turns into a lump, it's small, it's thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, as I said about gouts, that every ulcer which is not healed and not located on naked flesh is this way only due to one of these causes: among them, one cause is because of lack of blood in the body; or it's due to malice of him; or if there's hard flesh between him and his lips preventing natural tissue growth; or if it's due to a lump of some kind; or if that ulcer itself contains pus that mixes with his tissues which is of bad quality; or if the medicine isn't suitable for his healing; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it's pestilence; or because of property characteristics as in Saragossa where there's difficult digestion of illnesses from this area, and healing of abscesses is delayed due to nature; or if he has bone inside him, or pieces of bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, along with their signs and treatments using medicines as discussed in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus I will provide you knowledge on the treatment of fistulas which are made through surgical operations using my method.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; those are the ones that enter into major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spinal cord, or an intestine, or bladder, or any part of the back, or any joint composed by components like hand and chest. And these give proximity to the main limb and similarity.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so those of these fistulas that occur in this manner are from the diseases of hard recovery, and do not receive a cure, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is some of these fistulas whose depth does not reach to the places that were mentioned, and you hope for its cure, and want to gain knowledge about it, then attempt with a tool or try it out. And if the fistula follows straightness, then take hold of it when you're doing so.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Now if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine lead, where lead in their body rises and curves you should straighten out the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is moving freely, it isn't within your capacity to apply it over them with effort.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	And thus you must cleanse the opening for its openings, where the moisture by which you cleanse that goes to other openings and flows from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire carefully according to which manner it is possible for you to know if here are the nerves or not, and whether the size of the fistula is distant or close. Or whether this is a fistula with multiple openings which spans all of your strength on this very thing, through your questioning of the patient, by touching the area, understanding its significances and causes of accidents in the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have assessed all those causes accurately, then proceed with the treatment according to your confidence: it is that you now consider if this is a noticeable fistula nearby or in some location below, far from the joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any other place I've mentioned to you and stated.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then you dry out the fistula according to what was previously mentioned about its narrative, and keep this that is in that filtration and corruption of flesh, and this which has been born from the opening of flesh, or part and similar things, and treat that inside when it has healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Now if the fistula is of great depth and follows straightness, then dig into it as deep as possible, and reshape it from all its corrupted flesh. Then prepare bandages soaked in sharp medicines and insert them inside the cavity of the fistula which you have understood through instruments.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this inside certain passages where the sharp medicine will corrode everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh when it has healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Now if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have advised.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Now if the cause of fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about it and dry out this according to our advice, if you do not eliminate any cause of vein or nerve or main limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is discovered to you and there's corruption and darkness within them, then remove this entirely from where the corruption is present. And then treat it so that their flesh heals when they are made well.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed in this manner like you did before, then know that you have not eradicated the entire corruption. And thus you uncover them again thoroughly and carefully consider their condition and reshaping of them with your latest strength increase, then proceed to restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that's good; and otherwise, know that this corruption is in the deepness far from the body, which has not been achieved, thus with it you have nothing to do but leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupted and small, or it is within your capability to pull this out, then you pull it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if they are pieces of bone, then carefully perform the extraction of all these, and for those leave none behind for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Now if there is some contradiction with any cause of moisture, and in their operation you have neither fear nor mistake, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if it is not your preparation to leave the bones of your time, then rest on this wound so that this wound remains there, and leaves this inside where this is around those bones and ligaments, and keep the wound from consolidating, and hold back the section you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	And if you fear, rest on this palm submerged under a heated oil, or this palm submerged in an Egyptian ointment, or any of the healing ointments. When these ligaments have healed and the bones are separated from them, then relief is provided by this extraction.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it is a large bone like the bone of a rib or thigh or similar to those, and what from them is corrupted is only their flesh, then remove this just as much behind so that this darkness and corruption are removed, and then proceed to heal this wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If a large portion of this patient is corrupted, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that area and the entire location where the corruption has spread within the body. Then treat that internally until it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	I advise you to follow this method when dealing with someone in their bed, so that you place an example and helper next to your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Treat a young man around thirty years of age, who suffers pain in his leg, and from the divisions within, it is about the matter inside the body that has spread to the leg, and this is matter of abscesses into large abscesses, but do not attribute the cause to extrinsic factors.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then treat the extension of that for the error of doctors during which the abscess bursts, and take care of his moving materials, and his treatment is carefully performed until the change becomes fistulized, and do incisions in his pus-filled openings where all excreted moisture and body's humidity are.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctors' treatment lasted for more than two years, and I did not intervene in those who knew about it, as I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And see the change of this patient and the fluids that flowed from his several openings over a large area; and already, the body of that man was completely stiffened, and the color of him was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced a thread into one of those openings and led the thread to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all of those openings and found that they were connected to every part of the body.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I pricked myself and incised into one of those openings where I found part of the bone, I removed that corrupted material, and it was earthy, corrupted, and decayed; it had already corrupted a portion of the body in which it penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I prepared that which was discovered by me and removed from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I confirmed that it was not in the bone but that corruption which caused it and removed it, and I had already extracted it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then continued to restore the injury with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated the procedure and uncovered the bone again after the first discovery, and found continuous corruption within the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then proceeded with the treatment and restoration of it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered it on him again and did not cease to gradually drill into the bone carefully and complete the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I drilled around his palm, and he extracted from its marrow, and later restored that with medicines, and it slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of this section for him but due to the disposition of his veins and due to the limited tolerance of his breath and the lack of his death, which was happening constantly at all times due to excesses in spontaneous defecation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so, it is healed through complete recovery, and nothing replaces hard flesh in the location; good disposition of him has been made within his body and returned his virtue; it interacts well with his dispositions and does not oppose him during movement or harm him in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is protruding in a location of the body that has been operated on, then consider this method for further action: you should grasp firmly the part near the tip of that protruding bone, and instruct someone to extend it horizontally. Prepare a thick piece of linen several times thicker than the first piece; then place that linen over the flesh where the bone is exposed, extending its tip so that you can pull the flesh towards the parts around it, uncovering the flesh over the area you wish to cut so that the saw will not cut through the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a table or board under that exposed bone properly; when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw which does not cut through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And make sure the saw is cutting over the corroded area gradually, if it's in the hollow of the corrupted bone and doesn't appear in its physical manifestation, forcing another opening due to the saw's action.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not protruding, before it continues at one point from another, and the corruption is in its middle or part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all sides completely; then place a board under that, and proceed to saw through the first part where the corruption exists, with the continuity of the sawing continuing for the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the saw cut according to the location of the corruption as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not due to the joints themselves but due to something else.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the elbow of the hand or on the chest, it's difficult; however, consider how the corruption appears to you and where you can open it, then expose it according to any disposition that is possible for you, and correct each case as necessary with whatever tool, so long as it doesn't contradict your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which is the incisor and the saws to sharpen these bones are according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their thickness, and the subtlety and size and smallness of those, and their hardness and their rarity; because you must prepare every type of tool suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that you should consider this operation regarding the type of tool for which you would require; when you have extensive study and long experience in understanding methods of this art, and evidence from the methods used in illnesses, so by then you will already possess what is convenient according to these tools for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will instruct you at the end of this chapter regarding the number of tools that you should have, as well as those which you will perform according to your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Type of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Type of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a needle:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the tip of this needle follow the shape of the star-shaped keyring's head, and its points should follow the shape of the points of a star-shaped instrument.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not simply rub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or when there is a large and broad mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger blades of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller blades:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the lateral blades:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another well-made saw: it should have the curvature of a large arc towards its top and the sharpness of its iron, with the member at its base made in a decent downward slope.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the blades where there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle blade:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-ended blades:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small blades resembling tentacles:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of the incisors in which bones are sharpened:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incising tool; this resembles a needle, and its end is like a saw, and it is exhibited in various locations along the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a needle which conforms to the ratio of that which is pierced by the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and sharply pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, similar to all the causes we have mentioned for razors and incising tools and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the extremities of incision and the securing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are pressed or due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic cause, or because of the treatment you have given to that corruption with curative medicines and no cure was effective, or sometimes the corruption spreads from one part of the body, then it is necessary for you to incise that part inside this, so that the infection reaches the corruption, in order to prevent the patient's health from deteriorating through this to death or a greater malice than the misfortune of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which you apply is that the limb turns black inside, as if it has been burnt to ashes, or you place the darkness inside so that the burning spreads through that limb and consumes everything in it; then take care to incise that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is caused by the impact of certain venomous causes such as from a scorpion in water or from viper or from snake and others like them.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not allow space for the infection to spread into your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it reaches your hand, then you incise that part of the wrist, and do not allow space for the infection to spread into your arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it penetrates that point, then you incise the arm in the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the infection goes beyond that and often around the elbow, then death of the patient occurs; applying another cause to that is a quantity of virtue in treatment.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the chest when infection penetrates that part of the chest, then you incise there near one of the ribs.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it spreads through the rib cage, then you must incise all of the chest.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it penetrates towards the intestines, then you must incise the abdomen in the area of the intestine.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the infection has already reached into the intestines, then it is only removal and leaving the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way to incise or cut is that you grip one muscle at the point where you want to incise, and hold another muscle over it. Extend your other hand's fingers towards the left side of this point, and extend your hand's other fingers towards the right; then separate the flesh between these two muscles until you can reveal all the flesh; then cut or cut it in that space.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And make sure to hold a cloth over all sides by yourself so that it doesn't touch the area being treated, and bring the patient's injury properly adjusted and with pus in the wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If there occurs a flow of blood while you are working, then you apply the cautery gently to that area, or place some blood-restraining powder on it; and afterwards resume your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place the affected member in an appropriate position, and treat it while you are making it better.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I urge you to understand what happens when someone is bitten in the foot, this incident which I and you have discussed, which occurs in him blackness in his foot due to a mixture that was similar to fire's combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first happens inside his right hand, extending throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepares to release pus which helps the healing process go towards the limb with the intensity of his/her movement and pain, causing the foot to be immersed into the joint, leading to healthy recovery.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time this process happens in him with that corruption within the hand's index finger.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it reaches me, and I focus on understanding the excess of that which affects my hand from the medicines' impact; close to the body's transformation. The excess does not affect and begins moving into another finger starting from the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they ask me to immerse my hand in his/her, and I don't want to do that fearing the impact of that excess, more than worrying about the immersion of the hand's death, where the virtue of the patient was towards healing.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he recovers from me, returns to his land and informs me that the person prepared and immersed their entire hand, and they were healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not included this story merely for the sake of providing assistance on what relates to this disease, and as its meaning which is meant by it and according to which it is carried out.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding treatment and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When gangrene occurs in certain flesh-covered areas and the space of the gangrene extends until it collects pus; then it bursts and perforates, causing the pus to escape from him. The area becomes empty as if it were a vessel, and the infection that escapes is like thin fabric, without reaching deep corruption, not spreading into bone or nerves or muscle tissue, it is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends until corruption begins in any limb, then it is called a fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for this is to immerse that thread entirely like it's twisted, and especially when it's thin like fabric, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	And if you hope that the thread will stick and that this corruption hasn't reached its ultimate consequence, then you treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you regard it as a sinus, and if it's large, the arm that smells is made of Egyptian oil, so you treat it with an enema using this Egyptian medicine which consists of oil and vinegar mixed in equal parts, they are placed in a container, and then put on fire until the medicine boils and then cools down to honey-like consistency.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from this and dissolve it in water and honey; you treat the sinus with it, strengthen his/her opening, and let the medicine stay inside him/her for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And afterwards, extract this at speed; and do this for several days until the sinus is transformed and the pus is recovered.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And in some cases, you treat with water from ashes when this medicine is not available to you; and then take ash from onions, put it in water; afterwards, let that soak and treat the sinus with it until you confirm that the sinus is gone.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient doesn't tolerate this Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, then you treat it with water and honey where it's mixed with vinegar, and treat it with vinegar and honey where the property of honey is to transform and cleanse, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there's excess of coagulation ability and drying in wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And as you do this in some instances and confirm that the sinus has been healed, then treat it with what causes new flesh to form within him/her.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take dyafinicon grease and dissolve it in rubbed oil and vinegar that coagulates; or you treat with various medicines and other ointments whose properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is tight in which the enema tube cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron, pause with a warm cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it's enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the opening is wide, then you stitch his/her lips and let him/her have a quantity inside which an enema fits.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which blood flows is elevated towards the top part, then dry it in the lower pus area where it's located for the blood to flow into you. For when the arm is constricted in the sinus cavity, flesh will be formed within him/her.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the bone cavity as desired, then you should pierce that prepares the member for preparation so that the arm flows lightly from him according to your suitability and ensures no obstruction of the arm remains in him.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medicines that are placed over the desired sinus, so as to extend those above the patient's blanket.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the blanket should be of such size that it facilitates communication with all the sinus; and then insert the scissors into the right side of the sinus opening, making an incision slightly wider than the sinus opening; and then spread another part of his blanket with lion's balm according to the width of the incision, place this over him in a position far from the sinus opening so that it facilitates the extension of the arm for him and does not stretch the large blanket only a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Let it be that which is above the sinus opening, which he increases at all times so as to prevent what needs adjustment of his arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And in order that you know whether what flows from him of his arm is much or little, or if it is digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And you should also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in his abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you observe the material that is discharged over the sinus opening has already adhered, or forms adherence, then continue to remove it or let it heal by itself, and when you remove the dressing, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Let it be that if there is ample space around the sinus where the virus is subtle, then don't discard the patient's adherence, which allows his healing to proceed, which are certain individuals who take longer for tissue regeneration in their various sores, and among those are those who do the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the arm remains indigested for days around the sinus, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence to the sinus is delayed and causes prolongation, then you adjust in drying of the medicines; and if the medicines are dampened in their substance and lose their efficacy, they should be dried as if with lion's balm, when it is adjusted overabundance of addition of zinc.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the main thing that needs to be understood is that you take lion's balm as an ointment and dissolve it in refined oil, use its substance on him, apply this over him, and then use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when there is no arm involved in that action, use lion's balm as an ointment, honey when it cools and becomes thick, use him on the patient; or take myrrah and aloen and grind these together with some honey, heat this over fire and spread this mixed honey over a cloth, then strengthen this covering around the sinus; and spread this with the thickened honey which you have heated, grind this over a cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times these are administered to the patient in his long Latin language and according to the wisdom of celestial lilies (and indeed they are celestial lilies) as well as ground oatmeal, centaurium flower, then use those simples or adjust them, grind this together and sift it over the honey that I have recommended; and use these.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus persists and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has spread within him, it may now be probing into bones or other hard parts of his body, then you treat it with tubercular therapy as described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Regarding the treatment of infected skin and nail, and insertion of cuts in fingers and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that affects the nail of the foot or hand, and often extends to other fingers, and if it persists and healing takes time, it may be treated with a cauterization from within the abscess, or if it becomes corrupted, you cut into his finger near the nail bed, then proceed to corrode through the entire nail, push its corruption inward toward the bone which smells unpleasant for him, cut off the end of that finger and his color changes to black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that as we said in the division and if your treatment does not show results, then dig through all the excess that has accumulated under the nail and proceed to cauterize the sore area near this, for rapid healing is beneficial in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Let it be that if the bone is intact and the nail is healthy, and you have already removed the excess which encompasses the tissues inside, start poking him and guide this, then proceed to place your finger slightly under the angle of the nail where you poke through the flesh, push this further into the flesh making it easy to do so, pause over that part where remains from the flesh of the burning corrosive medicines until everything is well done; then treat this with balm until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	Let it be that if corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then proceed to dig out the bone in this area and remove it, for no healing will occur when there is corrupted bone within him.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice the corrosion and the corruption spreading through this finger, then proceed to cut into one of the joints according to where his memory is pressed, then treat it from within until he heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	Let it be that if there is percussion or friction at the nail, and there is intense pain in this area, then proceed to begin by bleeding out the patient from his thigh, then dry the nail with a sharp blade horizontally above this spot, make sure not to let the drying touch the flesh beneath the nail, for it could cause extreme pain in him leading to the development of excessive tissue adjustment in that place; then treat that area with what relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	A condition is described that naturally occurs in some men, where their flesh is very thin everywhere, and their bones are also weak. Or perhaps it's the thinness of their nails that's mentioned here.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And such things are found in the joint area of him, or his nature is in certain joints like nuts in a set.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	It could be that what's natural in some of these joints is not harmful, whereas what's natural in the joints that are thin and weak causes disease.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who are naturally fleshly, the section is mild, so when you insert that, it should be on their flesh at a shallow angle.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	A condition is when something is naturally found in the joint area, healing is difficult; so beware of removing it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case of what's naturally in the joint, be sure to follow these steps: when you begin inserting it, place the flesh against a round incision opening into the bone, and then proceed with cutting using one of those appropriate saws. Then ensure that the area being treated is properly healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	A condition to consolidate which occurs between the joints or due to the natural disposition of man in having arthritis, or through the consolidation of disease, or through burning by fire, or through resemblance. Then ensure that this consolidation allows the joints to return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place a pause between their layers by immersing them in rotted oil to prevent them from consolidating too easily, or separate these with another, or insert a thin sheet of lead inside for consolidation according to your method.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the hands' joints, then you dry that consolidation according to its preparation and ensure it conforms to the shape of the body part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the incision made for vice, they are varicous.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose, and they are swollen veins filled with melancholic excesses which occur in the body's limbs. The main manifestation of this is in the chest area, particularly for those who travel, work or carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then ensure that you administer the heart's purge of black cholera by making several incisions for forceful expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of such diseases involves two methods: the first is to make an incision and remove that black substance, and the second method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of this is done in this way: take at the beginning the chest with water caudate until that large substance is dissolved, which becomes liquid in the chest. Then strengthen the patient's chest towards the top part of the thighs under the joint area towards the bottom of the pubis on a board, and then dry the vein in a location or two or three sections widely apart. And lift the black blood towards your hand at the bottom end of the chest inside it, above it up to it, with the amount of substance you want and sufficient for what is needed, which will be removed by the power of the thigh.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then instruct him to avoid those foods causing black cholera, and command him to abstain from such things.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the treatment through bloodletting when the veins are full, and this is noted by the thigh.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The lifting of them occurs in this manner: if you have opened the thigh, then immerse it in water and soak the thigh with caudate water until it reddens and the veins become swollen; or if you are unable to use water due to lack of water, by having the body exercised when the limb is rubbed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the cord along the right side of the vein in section from the front or behind it. If you should reach the bottom under this thigh, use the pubis; or if at the lowest part of the body, use the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the cord with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it, and you should notice its appearance which becomes darker as it declines towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus when you have removed the cord and from the cord you see that white thing which is the thread.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place them under this light so that it's raised and shining from the cord, and hang them up on a nail or a hook.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section close to that section for three fingers, and scrape the cord from the area above the vein until you see it.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and insert that in the last section which is the ankle, and then extract that and lift it until it reaches the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you remove that from the section which is further up or any other of all sections, until it is completely removed; then insert that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you don't follow to extract and lift it, then insert a needle with thick double thread and tie that, or insert under this light and rotate your hand in all directions so that it shines.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to insert too deeply; if it breaks, you will find it difficult to lift that part again and it can cause harm to the thigh due to that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once you have extracted everything completely, then place over the site of the wound wool submerged in oil and rotted oil and regular oil, and treat that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the body is contracted due to a kind of twist that surrounds its parts and does not follow rectitude as we have said, then you should cut through all parts of the twist and at the places of surrounding in it, and suspend it with threads under which you lift everything entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your section so you don't penetrate the vein and don't disturb that area, as it will be difficult for you to lift that part; use your judgement in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision when there is a dry body:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a single thread knot:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as hot to the touch as with needles nor does it have a sharp tip so as to harm the vein; and it has great flexibility like wool, because if it were too thin, it would cut into the vein due to its thinness; having said that, it should have enough excess thickness as we've said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Regarding the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is formed in the regions of the lower abdomen like Al-Ategy in the desert region of Arabs and in the dry lands of India where little vegetation exists and where neither grass nor herbs grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And this vein is formed elsewhere in other parts of the body, such as the abdomen area.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its development is due to fermentation that occurs in the body like poison within the system, along with worms, vermin and parasites causing damage between the fluids and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of susceptibility to this condition is when this vein inflames in the abdomen, causing swelling; and nearby, there's an opening from that inflammation which looks like a cut from a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see it at the extremity, then think to place upon that a weight of lead whose weight is equal to that of one dragon. Within two dragons', and lift and lay flat the suspended lead from the belly.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And for each degree of pain caused by some cause outside the parts, wrap that with lead and let it hang.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain persists, then you should cut into one part of it and wrap that; do not cut that right at once as it will rupture inside when it comes out, because if you cut that it will be contracted and enters the flesh causing pus formation, inflammation in the area, and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And when it's treated gently and is extracted slowly piece by piece, so that it comes out of the back end of it without any cause getting caught in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein can occur in some individuals that span their length up to several palms and beyond, it is already known to me that someone has reached up to about twenty-two (xx) palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during treatment, then insert the rod into its channel and pierce that from long through the body, so that all contents inside are evacuated, and administer fermentation to the area for several days with medicines; afterwards treat that for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein causes some pain in ramps, especially when it appears at the joint of the chest or on the chest, and produces an opening, and comes out from any opening branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then treat it as we have said in the division and according to what was mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section concerning the formation of worms under the skin, it is referred to as "bovine discomfort".
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This ailment is named in some territories as "bovine discomfort" because it causes frequent symptoms in cattle that have worms inside them, and there are many of these worms located between the fluids and flesh, they move up and down throughout the body, and this manifests as a sensation spreading from member to member as it disrupts the fluids and releases externally.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its development is due to the fermentation of certain fluids like when worms, snakes, and roundworms occur in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is found due to the malice of this condition, when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the nostrils; then forcefully passes into it and destroys the nose, causing numerous symptoms.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to treat and remove it, do not act if you do not see its movement and appearance at your touch, then proceed by grasping what's above it and what remains below it firmly, and constrict tightly around it, and afterwards dry off from it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it's torn in the flesh and you don't restrain it, then place a cautery with fire on that area where it resides, and the main concern is corruption of it which causes destruction as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it's passed to the head near the nostrils, then apply firm pressure on the eyebrow area with strong constriction, and afterwards dry off from that region, then extract it; and remember for the patient to undergo transformation of their body through medicines that expel bad decaying fluids, and avoid foods causing fermentation.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the section concerning discomfort due to inflammation.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This ailment is named as "nafir" in our land, it's pain that occurs in some limbs and spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen this second one as I will report later.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was summoned to treat a woman with discomfort in her village, and I found her arm inflamed near the funis vein of the arm, and after it swelled for an hour, I saw that swelling move up like a worm going upwards towards this place, but less intensely than being hot, as if it were live silver flowing from one spot to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then feels the pain in that spot and gets stuck in the muscle, stays here for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And corrects into the other body where it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I was told by him that he moved around through his entire body as I saw; and I was too amazed at the exchange of parts and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my patients according to that manner, however I have seen movements where pain is found being exchanged from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May not see this like in the males as in the females.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider this to be only because of the female body's vulnerability, with its veins exposed, and in this case it manifests that sensation of wind being exchanged.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward flow in those who are susceptible and have moist blood with swollen veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you desire the patient's recovery, and they feel that pain, then it doesn't appear to you as it would seem to the naked eye like we've said, so you strengthen them there and let them slightly dry over that area where that constricted wind sensation is evident, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	May if you don't see it in your patients, then you treat that with the discharge of blood and whatever expels wind, and you use pills infused with garlic and other types of pills and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of feather extraction.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Feathers are diversified according to species, and according to the locations in the body where they exist, their diversity is that some of them have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones, being solid; others have three angles, and there are those with tongues; and there are those that are sharp.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and buttocks where I find them is according to two ways: whether the limbs or they are principal members being concave, like the brain, heart, stomach, lungs, intestines, bladder, and kidneys; and thus when you notice signs of death in one of these limbs and appear to you as symptoms of death, which cause I will explain shortly, then take care that you avoid removing that feather from those who die in the part where they are in their most advantageous positions, and if you do not notice these bad symptoms and the feather is not hidden in the depth of the limb; then you remove that feather and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the symptoms of fever are when you notice in the feather, it pierces through the bone, and is set on fire by the fume which is above the brain, which happens due to excessive heat, blindness, dizziness, nausea in patients, inflammation and nausea of the tongue, spasms and confusion in understanding, vomiting caused by anger, and when the word is cut off and speech is destroyed, it is visible at the site of the wound as a wet white spot resembling dust, and his appearance is similar to moisture in meat.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you notice these symptoms, then refrain from the treatment and removal of the feather, unless it is visible.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The symptoms of the feather when you find it near the left nipple, so that it is close to a hard cause and cannot be seen; and forcefully the movement of the feather is similar to the movement of dust, and the spread of the wound shows a black spot, and dies there coldness in extremities, fever sweat, fainting; and thus know that death descends completely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the feather has pierced the lungs are a sensation of blood foam in the wound, and the vessels close to the throat become congested, and the color of the body changes, it breathes a large spirit and asks for air to be breathed.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if you find the feather in the vest which is in the feet, then the pain is close to the small bones, it causes a great painful sensation and sighing, and not all of the muscles are swollen.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find the feather in the stomach, then there is a certain indigested food causing discomfort in the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you find the feather in the abdomen, and it is set inside, there is a wound opening, or the skin, or intestine which is ruptured; and there is no hope for the treatment of this case given the removal of the feather.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the feather is found in the bladder, and urine is discharged outside, it causes processes from within that go outward; and forcefully there is pain over the body, then know that this is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulder, assistant, ribs, backbones, collarbone, and so forth, are saved according to the most advantageous positions when the feather does not reach a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will explain this to you based on what I have seen about these feathers, so that you understand regarding the treatment you should use.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that in a person who was hit by a feather on the eyelid of their face near the nose, I would remove it from them on the other side, leave the ear hair of them, and they recover, and there is no damage to their nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And extract another arrow from a Jew which penetrates him in the center of his abdomen, leave the eyelid and keep it, the arrow was already hidden and could not be found from that source except for a small tip at which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the arrows of the sharp Turks, with iron as its head where there were no sockets.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it's the Jew, and doesn't hit his abdomen in a bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extract another arrow from a Christian man which was penetrating his thigh, and it was an Arabic arrow, that being the one with sockets; and then I pierced that between two veins, already submerged in his thigh; and then I sharpened that, and then extracted that, and saved the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And extract another arrow from a man which was penetrating his abdomen; I considered that he would die by that. Then, since it had been three days and there was no change in his condition due to any cause of his symptoms, I pierced the arrowhead and set it free, then saved him, and did not allow him to suffer an accident again.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow penetrated his thigh, the wound had healed on him, and because it had been seven years, I pulled the arrow from the crease of his leg.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow penetrated her abdomen; the wound is healed inside her, and it has not changed in her symptoms ever since, and the woman does not experience any discomfort during some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man to whom an arrow penetrated his face; the wound has healed and he removes the arrow, not experiencing any pain or similar sensations here.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extract the arrow from the king's prince's man which was penetrating his mid-nose area and had already descended to the right side a small one, making the entire arrow hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called upon for his treatment around the time of the insertion of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I felt the wound of the arrow extraction strongly; and then I inquired about that with a delicate probe, and did not feel it; but he felt it pulse under his right socket, and then I hoped that that pulse was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I sealed the area with an ointment that enhances both attraction and digestion, confirming to me that this spot is where we should apply it so as to reveal to me the site of the arrow, for its removal.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it did not occur at the significant spot where you obtained that place; and I continued to apply this ointment on him for several days without any accident happening; and the wound has healed meanwhile, and he can feel his nose again after being out of that space for several days and then tells me like this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I placed on the wound a corrosive medicine for several days until it healed; and upon this probe, I carefully examined that, and felt the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it became visible to me clearly the tip of the arrow, and passed this way for about four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then when the wound had become enlarged, and it became possible for me to insert tweezers into him, I made him more aware, and did not give way to nervousness; so I did not continue to sharpen or adjust on that with methods of tools until one day about that using forceps placement operations according to how those appear at the tip of the head, then extracting it; and then restoring that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors would judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; and I restored this and the wound has healed, and he is saved with complete health, and does not suffer at all in him for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you of the quality of extracting some arrows for you to take this rule and meaning on what I have not mentioned, where the divisions of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in this narrative or do not understand those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans wisely compare on few; and upon what is presented compared to what is missing; and finds a new operation and new instrument you must descend from the causes of foreign matters in that art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not discharged from the members in which they are placed, but according to two ways: or by piercing the place where it enters; or by opposing the other end.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is discharged through the place gives an entry, or that arrow proceeds from a meaty location, it is thrown and discharged.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not heed the time when you catch it, then cover that for several days until the meat around it subsides and is relieved of the pain and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is inserted in bones and you do not heed to remove it, then leave that for several days and repeat that with piercing and movement each day, and it will already be discharged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not heed your sense for such days, then cover that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow at all parts with subtle travel until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the needle is inserted into the bones of the head and has already progressed in one of the brain's ventricles, and manifests as certain accidents on the patient similar to those I mentioned in the lower body, then refrain from removing the needle and let it stay inside so that her being can be equalized for a few days; if however the needle reaches the cerebral cortex, then death will not be prolonged for her.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the needle is not inserted only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the cortex, and progresses in the lower body for a few days, and does not cause any effect due to those accidents, then you should consider the extraction of the needle and her condition.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is moved and does not follow your extraction, then you should administer travels in the circuit of the needle as we have prescribed, and place care on the area so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the needle is already hidden in the body's location, and hidden from feeling, then you inquire about that with temptation, and if you feel it, then pull it with such instruments as are convenient for her extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it on her due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the preon, and here there is no bone, nerve or vein, then cut into the wound so that she can be made wider and able to extract the needle.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it's on her earlobe that is pierced, then you cut into the flesh in which it is stuck from all sides with all the means you can do; consider this, if you cannot remove the flesh in the fracture of the earlobe and in the twisting of those within where they fit.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the removal of the needle in any location where it is, then you use your twisting and forceps from all sides so that this compels; and subtlety in deep subtlety so that the needle does not break and that it is made difficult for you to remove it and that removal.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at your time, then let it be for a few days until the parts that are in her circuit recover, and continue with this which later will ease.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it gives you opposition bleeding, then administer what we have said about treatment in her chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And protect your virtue from the risk of cutting a vein or nerve, or string, and use all possible means in your hands to remove the needle; do this with ease, tranquility, and slowness as I have instructed you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus make the needle move according to herself so that the lower body follows the figure according to which you should place the insertion of the needle in her, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible to you, then administer what is possible to you through the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And about the needles that are inserted against the other side, or that have already progressed in some part towards the outside parts, or if you feel the extremity of the needle due to the sensation of the part higher than the initial point and sometimes make it more prominent; then consider this; and choose the section according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken; and pull gently on that.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand against opposition so that the needle penetrates into the bone, widen yourself, and pull out that needle.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, let that be for a few days, then continue to work on it until you feel something.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the needle is in there, then push that towards her.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft is inserted and you wish to administer thrust, then insert that, if it's deaf, use a concave tool so that it enters the cavity in the head of the needle and gently push that towards her.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the needle is concave, then forcefully push that with a tool entering that, for the needle is eased by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the needle is elongated, then hollow out all the flesh in which it lies, if this is possible for you, and proceed to treat that with what suits.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the needle is deep in the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or on the side, and it's close to where you're touching it with temptation, then touch that with temptation, and if it's possible for you to grasp it from there, then grasp it from there and be cautious of cutting a vein or nerve, extract that needle, and if necessary stitch up the wound, and treat it so that it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of the forceps in which the needles are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let their ends be like a goose's bill that they make when they take hold of the needle, so as not to let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those there are made special loops, large, few and intermediate, according to the size quantity of the needle and its weakness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the concave thrust tool from this curved end like a goose's peak so that it can ease the inside surface of the needle in her, and thrusting force of that which is deaf:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the deafness thrust tool:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	So that way, as I do, it brings joy to their spirit in the curved tunnel of pain, guiding them towards relief.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From bloodletting through veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for bloodletting, from which it is customary to perform bloodletting at such and such points. which are in the head at the sixteenth point. These are the two pulsating veins, they are close to the ears and called auricular; these are two herbs that are in both temples visible; and these are two veins that are in two tear ducts of two eyes which are called aspiciens; and a vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and this vein is at the end of the nose; and these are two guigues located at the throat; and these are two veins that are on top of the tongue; and these are two veins that are at the bottom of the tongue; and - these are the veins called algecic -; and these are two veins leaving the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	These are the veins that are bloodletted in the arms, they are .5; Among those, there is one cephalic vein, which is at the base of the wild heart. The people call it "the blood vessel of the head", and it's also silent. It's called a middle ear vein, and composed of a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic; and they call that "the whole body blood vessel" among the people, and basilica is a vein placed in the domestic heart, which is called "citrullus", and the vulgar call it "blood vessel of the belly"; and arm veins, it's placed on the pulse point, it's this one where bloodletting takes place, it's the one that appears above the elbow through an obvious manifestation; and salvatella, it's the vein between the said auricular vein and the smaller one mentioned, and they are in their two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the chest and ribcage there are three veins; one of those is left behind by the curvature of the heart's wild side. And the second is sophena, its location is placed below the ribcage of the domestic heart. And sciatic vein, its location is beside the ribcage of the wild heart; and in the ribcage are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youth of the veins that are close to the ears is in ancient inflammation, migraine, effusion and old ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of causing that is according to what I recommend you: it should be on the head of the sick person, and rubbing the head of the sick person in the back of the neck at the place where both veins are pressed under a wide band with good friction; then strengthen the sick person's neck with one bend where the two appear close to the ears in two prefrontal locations on the head; and do that as you recommended, and if you feel the pulse of those as I mentioned, here there is temptation.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the surgical knife, and that is the one that is applied, then you insert those veins into the channel between where bloodletting goes to the mouth.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then you lift your hand to the vein and channel up to the higher parts, and cut the vein starting from an oblique incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be as much as two fingers or around that amount; and let blood flow out from the wound as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with powders and leave it in there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And this has been explained earlier in the beginning of this book about how to make incisions and their cautery treatment.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	These are the two arterial veins that are associated with bloodletting, they have ancient migraine, bad and frequent ophthalmia, and acute excess flows of body fluids in the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what I recommend you: strengthen the sick person's neck movement where the two veins appear by their obvious manifestation and demonstrate that there is a pulse at your mentioned location; then you will feel temptation.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the channel above the vein up to your mentioned location, and introduce the bloodletting incision there obliquely. Then raise the vein in its place; and cut it as you did with the other veins. And let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the neck of the sick person, place your mention location on the vein for an hour, and then rest there with powders while strengthening it above with firm pressure, and leave it in until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And this has already been explained in detail before about them and their incisions, as well as the excision at the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the quality of bloodletting for the frontal vein is close to the bloodletting of the cephalic vein in ancient face diseases, migraines, fever, and infected ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bloodletting for it is according to what I recommend you; that means the sick person should strengthen their neck with one bend where the vein appears. And then take the instrument which is called a sanguinaria (bladder hook) of which this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the tip prominently on it which is at the top of the sanguinaria over that vein and hit it against it obliquely or otherwise according to its manner, let the blood flow as much as you want; then release the puncture in the neck and strengthen it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes operations are performed at the abdominal cavity, however it is not advised that the surgical instrument be of a sudden extremity as with other surgical instruments, but rather from its side extremity. The surgical instrument in question moves across perpendicularly, where the bone is close and strong, causing the surgical cut to penetrate when it is delicate.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Direct the flow of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes towards the eye by means of the tears from the eye and the pus within the eye, and to the cheeks on the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the surgical cut is that the patient supports his head on one pillow, and brings the surgical cuts closer, while you stand over them.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the surgical cut is made across longitudinally for a short distance with one surgical instrument for several times, where there is no flesh in that area; and if the surgical tool is delicate, then break its end firmly.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And proceed to make the blood flow as much as necessary and then pause over those cuts, hold them for a night, and gently stretch those areas.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The surgical incision made on the nasal vein is associated with acute fever and strong sweating, as well as facial illnesses and migraine that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of his surgical incision is that the patient supports their head and positions it towards your left hand, taking the delicate and long cut under which you place it in the middle location on the nose according to straightness, where the vein does not appear at this point, and when the bleeding starts immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Make sure to finish your hand at the small surgical tool gradually and make the blood flow according to your need; then gently lie that area for a night, once it is restored more quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Direct the flow of the surgical incisions towards constriction, towards the onset of leprosy, and towards various facial illnesses, itching, and bad corrosive ulcers as well as erysipelas.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of that surgical incision is that the patient should support each one on their pillow; and the surgeon stands above the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a mattress.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And proceed to make the surgical incision along its length with an ample small surgical tool gradually; and then remove blood according to time quantity or according to what you need at that moment; and proceed to do something similar for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then gently stretch the muscles and hold both veins with mid-pressure in order that the patient is not over-heated, leaving them to rest by morning when the disease has healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the treatment of surgical incisions on the veins of the alerigic type corresponds to small pustules and papules in the mouth, decay of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and in the area around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of this surgical incision is that you should cut in front of you while supporting the head on one pillow, and gently lift both lips to examine which veins belong to each lip (one from the right side of the upper lip, and another from the left); then the demonstration for each is by the darkness of either side, and this is more so when there are thin black veins in their circuit; thus you would cut through each with a cross-cut incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubt and do not know which one it is, then you understand that the cut should be made on the larger of those, and from the clear pus present in those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make as if to cut both veins that are above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to proceed by cutting through the two veins located on the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are in front of you when looking at the tongue are approximately near the surgical incision of the cephalic type before those located in the gums, towards tonsillitis, and to various illnesses in the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of performing this surgical procedure is that you should follow the tongue between your most forward servants and lift up their tongue, then observe the tongue itself, identifying each vein on either side, and the color of both tends to be darker.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then cut each one; and remember that you should not finish your hand on those surgical incisions, as those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are surgically treated on the side belong to those areas that typically exist in all men, and their surgical incisions are performed according to two methods; or place them with a mirtilate or olive surgical instrument gradually getting smaller; or make them with a knife-like surgical tool, which they call an anessil, this is the form of theirs:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this anessil tool is suitable for sectioning, and those have specific narrow and gradual sizes depending on the thickness of the veins and their constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Shape of the mirtilate surgical incision:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the size match as you wish, and it is suitable to open the concave full veins that seem large in appearance, and towards those containing thick blood clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the shape of the olive surgical incision:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this surgical incision is of lesser width and has a delicate tip, suitable for surgical incisions on thinner veins that contain subtle blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Let the youth perform the bloodletting on the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: remove the disease from the patient's body that affects their limbs and abdomen, as well as from the belly where the pain resides.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And direct the bloodletting expert, when performing this bloodletting, to guard over it and maintain a careful attention on it, where there is an artery beneath. If they err and misjudge during the puncture of bloodletting, that artery will be incised and blood will flow out from it, thus ensuring not to bleed too deeply with a sharp blade before stopping the bleeding immediately like it should be done.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear for a clear manifestation, then when you notice that it is not there, change to another one, or try looking for any other option; or bleed from where it ends on your arm, which is clearly visible; and apply bloodletting with the tool of the expert in this manner just as we have described.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform bloodletting on the patient's inner elbow, then proceed in front of the bend of your arm where you know the location of your wrist bones. Then press your hand onto them, and adjust your position with your arm; press down the vein at the concave section of bloodletting just as we have described. Be sure to do this without hitting the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press down with strength on the area where you have pressed your hand, there is an inflation in that spot under pressure, then that inflation corresponds to the artery. So, avoid that area accordingly.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows during bloodletting like in a child, and the blood is thin and light, then you know it's the blood of the artery; then pinch it and keep your hand pressed on that spot for an extended period. Then hold your hand as we have instructed, and if the blood stops, where the vein has been separated, then strengthen your arm and let that area be.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And watch over the patient's wound from infection, and keep a careful eye on them not to let it get infected for some days until they recover.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood does not stop, and you should not use medicine for that; then when it's visible to you, you will incise the artery if possible; where its extremity is contracted, and the blood stops. Or take some time with your hands, do this again, and hold one strong on the area of the vein near the bend in your arm and within a powder by the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood stops, then it's good; and otherwise, treat that with the medicine as described before in relation to the memory of the place where the powder of blood flow should be applied.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And stopping the flow of blood in some positions due to the small size of the wound and the limitations of your arm movement can be challenging.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The bloodletting from the dark vein is done by youth, extracting the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for it is made up of branches from the basilic vein and cephalic vein, as we have described.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And when performing bloodletting, let the expert who is skilled in this be attentive during the process, where there is pressure in your bloodletting; because wherever you feel that area has a nerve. If they correctly judge during puncturing and find the nerve, it might cause a state of confusion or unwellness, making recovery difficult, and if only partially treated, recovering completely will be hard. This particular nerve becomes noticeable through feelings; so, when it is hidden by certain people and is subtle but not shown, then while performing bloodletting with your tool at the spot closest to the skin edge, avoid hitting the nerves in the strength of your action.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The bloodletting from the cephalic vein involves extracting the blood from the head and relieving the pains in the limbs.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And when doing this correctly, if you want the bloodletting to use an olive oil cautery or a myrtle wood one; which is the preserved pus of all veins, that does not leave your artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, when you're performing bloodletting, be sure to do it in such a way that you don't just puncture the tip of the tongue; look for the smallest area of pus and avoid it if possible. Otherwise, when you first press on the area where you intend to perform bloodletting, notice it in several noticeable spots.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, for some people, strength is recommended, even if bloodletting doesn't occur during the first press. In that case, do not neglect to notice that lump.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	That is, the quality of bloodletting and its complications are noteworthy, in which you should consider correcting them.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first point is that you should know bloodletting should only be administered for the maintenance of health, with hope for recovery and caution against illness. It should be performed using one of the veins typically found in the armpit: cephalic, dark, or basilic veins. Bloodletting should start at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach during springtime and autumn, and before meals during winter when there are noticeable signs of rejuvenation.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And bloodletting should be performed and end by the time three hours have passed since dawn or the first hour of day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. When joint pain occurs due to convenience and necessity at any time of day or night, everywhere and in all circumstances, that is when botulism may be administered.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let the elephant not receive botulism until it is fourteen years old, and the pregnant woman should not be given botulism unless after a quarter of a month from the seventh month, and elderly people should not be given botulism those who have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be given botulism by any method, let them change their intestines before the botulism is administered with a lion's purgative. If in those there is a retained wound, so that the veins do not pull the superfluities during the botulism of the intestines, which are cleansed and do not contaminate the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let no patient receive botulism during the time of their fasting, nor from illness or intoxication, nor from disease caused by excess or lack of food and drink, nor from fever or stomach pain, nor from pregnancy, childbirth, or any activity that dissolves their health, either bodily or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And in considering the subtlety of the humors before this if the complaint is large, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is feasible for them.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And in between baths if any cause does not prohibit it, or if you exercise through some exercise so that the complaint becomes subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And let the botulism be given to them in the feet of the day, around the time of three o'clock, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And ensure that the foot of that person be watched on every day with all animal disease accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as work and excessive worry, sex and similar ones.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And according to their desire, make the causes be present in using that which they have a custom of with aromaticity and fragrance, as well as perfumes and similar things, depending on the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the botulism practitioner be on a cushion that is better than the cushion of whom one should give botulism.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And extend their arm, and rub that with their hand the botulism applicator for two or three minutes; and strengthen it with leather and encircle that for two minutes.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And for the tightness that is prepared, if the tightness does not equate or if the tightness is from superfluity, then prohibit any discharge of the complaint; or if it is from softening, then prohibit the body of the complaint altogether.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And for the tightness, let him who should be given botulism rub his hands together between them while the veins are inflated, and declare it to their feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And for the botulism practitioner, let them apply a little ancient anti-inflammatory oil to the botulism on their hand. Then place his last finger of his right hand over that vein and leave it there until you feel the vein protruding slightly. The position is such that the veins are identified; thus, when you find that as you pull on the cord you see veins escaping, from those you know that the area is full of wind. When you place your hand near the area where botulism should be administered, it relaxes and then contracts against the hand, revealing what's underneath. The practitioner should not press directly on the vein; if they do, that means the area needs more space, so the practitioner will need to adjust accordingly.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, let it be known that the botulism administrator must remain firm and be concerned about all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then discontinue the application of the botulism. However, if the vein is punctured in one minute, then it's enough; otherwise, continue this process for another minute while staying at that location or applying pressure over them if the location isn't moving.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area becomes red, or if the patient feels dizzy, then let it rest for a day or two, and do not apply pressure, as firmness may pull out pus. Do not take a bath either.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And proceed to perform the botulism again if she desires it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the pain is slight and there's subtle discomfort, and you fear that not enough pain will occur, then continue with the botulism at that place according to rectitude and adjust in the application slightly. Do this with pressure before the area becomes red, as for men, once it gets red, you should have few applications.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if you see that it has already turned red, then do not continue over them, for there is no excuse for any cause; pause on them for some part of the oil opening, which delights the body from the pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it's better in this area than oil and that other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer an oil opening in every botulism when botulism of the veins is required to prohibit the body from pain, and they do this with terebinth resin and anointing as delighting and soothing when it's stopped on one part over that area, where the pain becomes subtle and is stirred up when it's large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the area of botulism a large pus forms, which occurs in several minutes, especially for those who have not bled except that moment or at the opening of the vein slightly, and then you apply heat, pause on the area with a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded. Then strengthen that for an hour until it's dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And perform as described near the insertion of that vein from the patient or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any darkness or greenness in the place for a few days, do not notice this; and if you wish, apply over that some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice from thyme or calamus or similar substances.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Swollen lymph nodes resulting in abscesses and swellings, you should perform bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand on that, and if you then feel softness, keep your compression on that; and then that swelling is bad and harmful. And from now on, be careful to apply over that any substance we have discussed, for it will bleed out of the sanguine artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply plaster to that where it is bound up, so the area is sustained, and then attend to that with another treatment while it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And know how to extract from the blood for every man according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it bleed inside until there's a wound; and similarly, if you find it thick, let it bleed inside until there's thinness; and similarly, if it's sharp, inside where its sharpness will be.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And consider for the one who is full and strong and needs blood extraction in a particular area, expand the bloodletting from the vein and let the bloodletting be deep.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for the one who is frail, do the opposite of that, and know how to extract it in numerous areas, and let its extraction be thorough.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing that can be done in bloodletting from a vein is to make a cross-section cut, not to pierce.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of bloodletting saves from the flow of blood and injury to nerves, it is commendable and more safe than bloodletting according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And it is customary for this to lead to a sudden fainting, you should perform bloodletting, and know that you should treat that before bloodletting with a little of wine in the blood of balsam or simple oxymel; and draw out the blood from the body in three areas or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is due to fullness, then take before bloodletting for infusion in a mixture of myrrh or in flavored honey water containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar substances, or in flavored and fragrant aromatic waters.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if a fainting occurs you should perform bloodletting, and it is because of his movement in the blood channel, then know that he should drink water from meat and flavored very subtle wine; use of aromaticity with spices, and limit his food to that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we have discussed in the division for fainting by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if someone wants to purge their arm and dissolve their blood again, know that for this man the bloodletting is by evacuation method, and his virtue being cold, it will purge the blood gradually, according to the quantity of its virtue over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if someone wants to purge their arm and relieve their blood again, and their body is strong, then perform this about 7 or 9 hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if someone wants to drain their body's blood in the opposite direction from where it declines, know that this should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And if that body already has purged blood and is sharp and causes a fever, know that you should drain his blood in one go and let it be from his strong flow of blood, have the incision expanded to cause fainting, since you will have kept all the conditions for bloodletting; and place your hand on his pulse so as not to die at a point of fainting. The number of areas where this happens depends on how unaware and negligent the bloodletter is.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not consider when you wish to move the arm and relieve the blood again, as soon as the outlet of the vein is closed and makes it difficult to purge the blood, that you press below that with vigor and bend slightly its extension, which this is too harsh.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it bleed again; or keep that at the sharpness of bloodletting which is coagulated in the outlet of the vein; or place over that with thuja oil, or sage, and press gently on that so that the blood will come out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not touch it until the abscess subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to relieve the blood again and it is not an excuse, then prick that at that place or on another arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "arm cord" is bloodletted in the location of the dark or the basilic vein, when they are not congested or hidden, which it consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of bloodletting for him is that the patient immerses his hand in hot water until it turns red easily and the vein becomes manifestly visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And place your strength over that with ligature and moderate constriction; and perform bloodletting according to the transverse small cut, not laterally or longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make your incision wide and place your bloodletting instrument at which you will bleed it on the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of urine is forbidden, then you should extend your hand into the bladder and let the urine run within the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from extending your hand into the bladder water, and during winter, the urine vessel is held in bladder water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the bloodletting from this vein is considered safer than from all other veins; it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve for you to avoid.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And bloodletting from the wrist of the right hand corresponds to illnesses affecting the male reproductive organs.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of bloodletting for you is that you strengthen your hand or with your own hand, because you have it placed in bladder water, while the vein is swollen and can be demonstrated by pressure; and then bleed there across. And if you incise all of that, do not bleed there repeatedly.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to finish your hand at the bloodletting instrument, for otherwise you will damage the nerves of the fingers without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then extend your hand into the bladder water and let the urine flow through it; if you do not extend it in the bladder water, the urine will clot in the opening of the vein, and this is forbidden for flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as the amount of urine is extracted according to need, then you press over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not become solidly clotted; similarly do this in all straight lines.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And for the young person of bloodletting from that on the left hand, it corresponds to illnesses affecting the male organs.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do something similar for the bloodletting in this case as you did with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the young person of the phrenic vein for bloodletting is to illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as male reproductive organ illnesses, and retention of menses, and to illnesses of veins and ulcers of thighs and old chest ailments, and they correspond to illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of bloodletting for this is that the body submerges its chest in bladder water and does friction within which veins appear; and lie over the chest joint with the vein's apparent location; and on that, you should find its branches when they are swollen.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then bleed it from the most extensive branch or reduce it so that you can add its increase to it, which is better and more salty.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you bleed there on the chest surface, then you avoid the nerves that are around that area of the chest, and stop your bloodletting at which you are bleeding across, as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the bloodlettings be useful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If urine emission is forbidden, then extend the leg of the patient in bladder water and let the urine flow through that while it is being emptied.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting instrument fails in the first attempt, then try at the bloodletting again on its own part where there is salt; and do not fear for your illness, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do it with the phrenic nerve on the other chest equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, it is to find its location at the opening of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the young person of bloodletting for this is when it's in the groin due to disease or injury.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of bloodletting for this is that the body enters into a bath and washes and strengthens the leg of the person from the heel of the foot up to above four fingers along a long thin bend, which does not appear except like this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you bleed that according to each organ that is within your ability and according to across-cutting, which is better; or incise it through incision or cut it off through cutting, where the location is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in swollen men with a large mass; and if you find that, not appearing upon touch all over, then bleed some branch of it, and that which appears behind the earlobe on the hand is it.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard yourself from the nerves, and let the amount of urine flow as you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then relax the constriction and place your hand on the location of the bloodletting somewhat, strengthening that which is only slightly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding aspiration and the qualities to use those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventosas are from stones, or thorns, or splinters.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventosions are done in two ways: one of them is through incision and extraction of blood, and the other is after incision then suction.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this type of suction that follows incision is done in two ways: or with fire or with heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the twelve locations on which bloodletting and suction are administered include: one where bleeding is performed followed by suction, this is alnocrati, it's the last part of the head; and a mid-location between the two parts of the neck; and suction from below the jawbone up to inside the mouth; and suction from both spatulas; and suction from alohoster, this is on the tip of the tongue; and suction from two points, these are one inch apart; and suction from both cavities; and suction from both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventilation does not expel the disease from the narrow veins spreading in the flesh, and thus it does not reach its virtue through those veins; similarly to what happens with bloodletting. Nor should ventilation be performed with fire or hot iron in any illness caused by overfullness inside where the entire body is not evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessity requires ventilation for illness or continuous pain, administer it at all times during the month and at its end, in the middle of the month and at any other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This cause is what leads men in whom pain multiplies inside due to the need for extraction by ventilation; it finds its severe burden and excessiveness in their head, face, neck, chest; it causes itching on their face and forehead, darkness and confusion in their breaths; it also results in shifting of the location for their ventilation; it leads to increased laughter from them; it finds pleasure in pain in their mouth or makes their tongue swollen and spit out pain; it multiplies their sleeping time; it finds pain during sleep, restlessness, injuries, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when in any cause of those, especially if it is towards the end or middle of the month, then command that ventilation be performed since it has passed the day or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The reason for neck ventilation is that when it affects the gravity in the head and where it settles in the breaths; more importantly, consider this as an entire evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is at the site of bloodletting for the cephalic area.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it's not appropriate to use someone who is full of congestion or in which there is phlegm, as this causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And that's why it's not recommended to use those elderly ones, and in those with ailments on their heads.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	It's detrimental for the one who keeps using that on them to experience forgetfulness; thus, it's recommended that you instruct the person performing ventilation to leave their hand near but not too close to where you've indicated, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Ventilation of alcohol is at the site of bloodletting for the dark vein and basilica: thus it leads to asthma, constriction of airways, and splitting of the lungs; it also causes coughing and overfullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it's advised that the alcohol-stuffed suction cup is small; otherwise, if placed too long, it causes weakening in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	Ventilation with aguardiente leads to sudden head pain and eye diseases, as well as migraines, pre-seizure symptoms, and inflammation; it also causes toothache. This is performed at the site of bloodletting for the basilica vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it's advisable to instruct the person performing ventilation not to press their hand against a scarification, so as not to pierce an artery and allow for the flow of pain.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Ventilation for an extended period on the chin leads to alcohol in the mouth, decay of gum tissue, and appearances similar to other illnesses that are present in the mouth; it is performed at the site of bloodletting for alhieric which is found in both cheeks.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The ventilation performed on the two spatula areas leads to caphatan, which is caused by overfullness of heat quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two divisions inside the nostrils corresponds to the bloodletting of three veins: the basilica, dark, and cephalic ones. It draws out pain from all those numerous veins that are in the body, as well as the narrow veins of other veins into which it spreads between the larger veins to reach the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the person performing suction not to proceed with scarification, as that area is exposed skin, and you leave it with nerves and arteries underneath.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It's also a suction cup for when someone is affected by hemorrhoids and causes anal bleeding as well as ulcers in those areas.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it's recommended that you instruct the person performing suction to use a large suction cup and one made of iron since the area requires intense drying; it should have thin, firm suction cups and be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The small rib suction cups through apparent diminution draw out pain from the entire body and cause old stomachaches, back pain, and bladder issues; they also induce menstruation and result in coughing and exacerbation. These are performed at the site of bloodletting for two Sophenas and Alahorcoben, as well as two cavils.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it weakens the entire body and causes a syncope in vigorous men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And when using Alahorcoben suction cups, it is preferable to use them alongside the two rib suction cups.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of suction cups is to place the suction cup at the beginning view and slide it over warm grease, without prolonging the position of the suction cups, rather pause them slightly, remove them gradually, and let the fluids come to the area evenly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And don't stop repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the symptoms of pain become apparent.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you perform the scarification gradually and continue applying the grease little by little, while considering the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that man who has tough, hard flesh gets cut, it is advised to cut him only once and not press too deep, so as to prevent the wound from becoming ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the scraper to widen the scraping and do it gently, always suctioning for ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is swelling in the wound, then you should scrape twice, where in the first scrape you open up the pathway for infiltration into the wound and its fluid content.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, perform an inspection of the acquired fluid from the extraction of the swollen material.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is filled with a thick pus, then it should be scraped again for a third time to achieve the remainder.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we wish to extract some pus little by little or just a small amount, suffice with one scraping.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish for the extraction of thick pus, we scrape with multiple scrapings; and if we know that the pus is thick, then you should scrape with a wave-like scraping technique.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scraping ends at the depth of the cut just like that.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And for the one whose cut is thick, hard, dark, and his pores are stretched, you should make the suction cup locations more soothing, more open, more decisively resolved; if it's in summer, something like aloes oil or violet leaf oil, or sweet almond oil, or camomile seed oil; and if it's in winter, then oils of narcissus, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or mustard oil, and similar to those.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, dry, then the oil should be bitter, or balm oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar to these.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the scraper has ample hard flesh pores, then it should be forbidden for oil and you should take these near the suction areas of the suction cups with water or with a dark water from sunflower oil, or water from onions, or water from leeks, similar to them.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose pus is of thick moisture, wash his suction cups with vinegar or water from mallow and sumac, similar to these.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash his suction cups with old vinegar or with water from sansevieria, which is marjoram, or from infusion of fennel, or chamomile, similar to these.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it should be that the suction is kept in front of bathing; moreover, you should administer it close to the heat of bathing for an hour or two, and it should sleep near the suction.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is required is that the blood-sucking tool be regulated before suctioning.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And when considering the meal: if the person who needs blood-letting has a hot temperament and is upset by his thick pus and inflammation, then you should have him take cooling causes, such as vinegar salads, and watercress with vinegar, and milk, and sarsaparilla, and julep, and similar to these.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And let his meals consist of things like chicken, and rabbits stewed in wine, and meat seasoned with herbs, and similar to these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose complexion is pale, have him drink absinthe, or absinthe made from sarsaparilla seeds, and sumac, and wine with a fragrant odor between old and new; and it should be recommended that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and pause his meals of chicken, cabbages, peas, small rabbits, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it should be that the amount of drink on the day of suction and blood-letting is greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be that they are given to drink for some hours before certain people take tyrothricin, or muscle medicines such as magnesium, or before suction or blood-letting, or nearby, so that the main limbs are comforted and pus is made subtle; do not have them take those baths.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Let the suction cups that are scraped be placed on the belly and gout, on the navel, under the joints, and on the wide buttocks, for these limbs do not endure scraping themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it should not be due to pus from limbs themselves but the accumulation of pus in the breast during gouty inflammation of the breast's pus; and we use this for dissolving the thick, viscous wind in the limbs, such as suction on the abdomen and umbilicus; which invigorates the limb and calms it down and alleviates the pain that resolves the wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it is used on the lungs upon their affection or coughing, through the force of suction it helps a person's breath and eradicates the cough from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly when it is used on the belly and chest, it helps to dispel wind in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These suction cups are administered with broth alone; some are given with fire instead.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are given full of hot water in gout diseases affecting the chest.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why suction is filled with large pus, it's either hot water alone or water in which herbs suitable for this purpose are cooked.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Shape of suction administered at fire: make the size of the opening to two fingers, as we have made it; and the quantity of the air should be that of a palm; and place it at his back, in the area where is in the circuit, that of him, most part of him, pull it gently according to the amount that enters into it one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	A surgical procedure of using an herb or citrus fruit, with large cuts, lion, equal and smooth until none cause the member to move its position upon it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the best of the middle section of the herb or iron, where the candle is placed under the burning fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the large suction of this one that we have prescribed; and the little fluid from this according to the illnesses and the state of those who use this.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suckers of children and exhausted ones are different from the suckers of youths and with large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction on fire over the member is to extend the coal on fire from wood moderately in front of a small candle of wax, and place that one over the middle section of the herb across at the middle location of the suction, so that the fire be lit around your part not to burn the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place it on the body of the patient, and it should be over the pull that we said, within which when we have the suckers and don't need them anymore but they make vapor over that pull, then the suction will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And according to its manner, heat the coal, and repeat this if you need more of this.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In suction used in the illness of pleurisy, with water, which does not have a transverse herb or pull, and is not administered but when it is filled with water, and placed only on the body.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it is: And this suction, the bigger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capítulo .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Suctions are not administered on the muscles of the body but only in those parts where there is no possibility of placing a suction instrument due to their small size, as with the bladder and gum and similar organs; or in limb-free skin, as said for the mouth and those like it.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those which you have found bloodletting suckers that are in the waters of boiling water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then leave them soaked in hot water for the day and night, making sure none causes irritation inside their stomach; and after that, evacuate the body during bloodletting and with suckers; and then rub the patient's body until they turn red; and finally place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and the case is ready.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw pus from the place with suction, it is better in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the spot with vinegar and add hot water; and then rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the patient extends to the place where the bloodletting instruments are, and this is what comes out, then you insert a cloth in water that's been heated, and place it there so that the discharge is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle on it powdered vitriol or ointments and other substances that have a stanching effect, until the blood is coagulated; or place the ashes of cooked beans over the spot and leave them so that the beans adhere to the spot, until the blood has coagulated.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And indeed, if necessary, repeat the use of bloodletting instruments, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is forbidden from suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or leave a needle in the places where it makes blood come out; and then place them there, so that those when feeling any blood do it immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little powdered aloes or salt or ashes on them and cauterize immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And thus begins the therapy for the remaining part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is about essential treatments in the art of medicine; it's the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son child, know that people of the medical profession and the laymen and those who are going to spend their time ignoring the works of the Ancients or even reading a single word from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the sciences on earth is private; and I have not forgotten anything that has been done over time; and I did not exhibit what I have learned, but rather through the length of reading the works of the Ancients and studying their understanding, where I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And moreover, direct towards experimentation and study throughout your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all of my science and what has been passed through my experiment on that; thus abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from the occupation of long explanation; and abbreviate this at the end of the abbreviation; and demonstrate this at the end of declaration; and form this into various forms of movements that are administered in those, as done by adding declaration, so as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and gathering of what needs to be fractured bones, from those of which prior mention is necessary before we begin reciting the fractures of members and various things pertaining to each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Please note that in the prologue of this chapter, we mention summaries of the discourse; and chapters whose understanding requires the craftsmen to be guided towards truthfulness about those; they are you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art and others from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so say that when you come across a fracture or dislocation or twist or jamming, then you should proceed to the beginning with bloodletting or treat that area, or at any time, if no cause is prohibited, such as vitiation of the vital force, or it is what happens to it with effusion, or even in decrepitude, or it's time for strong heat, or strong friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And it is good to be content with food consisting of herbs like fennel and meats of rabbits and crabs; and forbid heavy meats and fill instead with all kinds of food that fills the veins of the body, within which you can ensure the prevention of an abscess, and if you are not afraid of the effusion of matter in the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first state where they usually are.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is noted that the patient should eat nutritive foods with mobility and bulk, in which viscosity exists, such as bread made from flour cooked in water, broth, caps, fish, bellies of cows, hams, fresh meats, and large and similar types of food, and under this regimen a slight and milky coagulation of bone pus takes place.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that broken bones in adults and those of the elderly do not remain broken as they are according to their nature and become consolidated due to the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continuous according to their nature for the drying of those limbs, and they are continuous and consolidated those that are from them at the end of childhood, such as bones of small infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and commands that for every cause similar to glue affecting a broken bone throughout the body there is fattiness that adheres and strengthens it internally; at times of coagulation and conglutination over time, within which comes the end of strength and firmness; such as heat at the beginning, within which no cause prohibits him from doing his work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to abstain from foods of the patient, foods in which there is gravity, viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fracture according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are various according to the diversity of the limbs, where a fracture of bone of the hip is different from the fracture of skull bone; and a fracture of limb bone is different from the fracture of leg bone; similarly, all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I conclude this recollection of every species of fracture, detailed in its chapter separately from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures internally.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are diversified species of fractures within the bones; which is caused by curvilinear fracture or another that happens in its star-like positions. Some have been divided into fractures according to the length of the bone: these are fractures of the satagia, stars and addictions both originating from and not originating from them, as they are made when writing is prepared, and it's a fracture with swelling and disruption in the head, and it's small fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every species there is a specific remedy or trouble in its restoration according to that which will be the distinct recall of it in its respective places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thus it is known that bone fracture: there's a twist in it, and its prominence and attachment to feeling, and it's when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there's no obvious twist nor is it felt under your touch when you press the bone with force and the patient doesn't experience much pain, then there isn't a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There may be a twist or small fracture, so it's noted that you should feel it with your hand and under compression of the whole; then there's a pause on the subject of medicines where one recalls the recall at that moment which is suitable for this location; and it's straightened by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the place is curved and isn't split into two or another thing doesn't happen to it at its star-like position, such as if it's expanded completely throughout its circumference, then it's noted that you should start from your time with rectification of this location which happened at this moment with an abscess cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it caused an abscess cautery, then smooth that over several days until the abscess ceases; and then equalize that according to any method you can of elevation and invention.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that restoration of this and union of this are much more delicate than in the bone where it happens at satagia.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what will be recalled for you about it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	And if in the bones it's at satagia points, then an extension of this broken limb from two parts is necessary, whether it's the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And make your position where you place the limbs evenly according to their natural shape, while the parts are being stretched out from the body's length, then ensure that you force those additions back into them and according to any method you can apply in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And observe so that your strength does not cause injury or damage to the patient during your operation, and proceed according to your ability by fitting one bone to another according to the best methods.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And when in that moment you profitably touch with your hand there, and if you notice any difference cause here, correct that one and adjust it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, even as doctors often see boils produce a pus-filled blister through their operation, or cause a constriction in the limb like what we have seen through their boil operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And adjust, ensure equilibrium and appropriate operation and compression of that limb, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and instruct them to avoid harming that during their wakefulness and sleep, and observe its movement and agitation, and consider its decay, and take all their movements with your entire virtue; wait until the position of the limb is in a position where pain or injury occurs when it's disposed in the position of the member; then make sure you rearrange that to another position for which they do not feel pain; and observe that the position of them there should be straight and equal, so that when restored, no bending will occur to the limb.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the compression of the limb is that which I recommend; for you should know that limbs break differently in their size and in their grandeur, and in their form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and so on, where they resemble these, then make sure that the wrapping is of very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large like the thigh or chest, make sure they have a padded and hard covering; when you tie the padding tightly around the large strong limb from all sides in equal compression, so that no mark appears on it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And gradually begin your adjustment of equilibrium, pause pleasantly according to this, over the location of that fracture on three or four layers depending on which member it is; and strengthen your hand a little on this layer.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And gradually move towards that upper part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen moderately so that you do not force your compression where you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And gradually extend the layer of the fracture location a little, and soften the compression gradually as you take control of a large part of the location.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And gradually take another bend and cover that second boil over the stretched location with a layer, and move towards the layers near the most upper part of the fracture; and in your operation, adjust and soften this compression according to what we have said about the first layer above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And gradually pause between the layers of stopping or cloth which matches the curvature of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it; and otherwise, do not cause any damage.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And gradually pause on the other bend, and gradually adjust over these star-shaped layers which have been made just now, if there is no swelling or pus blister in this area, then pause where that pus is; and leave it for a few days; and then strengthen on this the stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the stars of the middle part should be made from red wood, and formed wisely; or they can be made from palm branches; or from wooden sticks; and each star's width should follow this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And make sure that the star placed on that fracture is larger and slightly thicker than the other stars; the length of the star according to how it reads in size and grandeur for the member; gradually strengthen over these stars towards another bend as per your initial compression; gradually lie down properly as we have said about compression, so that your compression is more at the location of the fracture, and the longer it extends from the fracture, the less the compression.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are medium in size and fineness, and use many of them; if the threads are large, as I have seen in some instances during operations where they place the threads of ropes from the curvature, this is a great mistake when making the compression equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are not convenient either, because you won't achieve the compression with them that you want, and make sure there is no more than one finger's width between each thread.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is disturbed by the ends of the stars near the compression in those sensitive areas, then pause these with a cloth or finely spun wool so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are due to injury, involve disruption in the chain of events, and I will recall that in that particular case according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that breaking all limbs is not healed by laying them under stars on the first day; the cause is that when a limb, if it's large, can't be placed over its stars rather than around three or four days or more, depending on your confidence in the occurrence of abscess after cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of plastering which the ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering similar to the abrution of fracture restoration, suitable for complex injuries and mostly for women and children, which is about what does not generate heat or friction: it consists of using flour powder, which is the heart of the flour that produces movement in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And do it as described, or else sieve that through egg white, and let the mixture of this not-thin nor delicate set; then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for setting bones and joints dislocated or twisted: prepare a mixture of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, olibanum, and myrrh, which is ground into one thousand grain sanders, all of it equals to half a dragon. For each dragon's weight, add equal parts of frankincense and aloes, also equal to half a dragon; then add twenty grains of clove and sift them with water or with the white part of an egg if the patient is very delicate; and then use this plaster, which has good composition and heals slightly broken bones, restoring them to their original state, and gives strength to men's limbs.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for setting broken bones and twisted limbs, which restores them: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white alum in one dragon's quantity; add equal parts of frankincense and aloes, also five dragons' worth; include acacia from the sixth dragon; use Armenian mastic twenty dragons' quantity.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of them are ground in a mortar for the wound to heal, they are sieved, and they are mixed with water or egg white and then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The method of plastering joints and bones that are separated from their places, and the occurrence of pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: take catgut thread and immerse it in vinegar and olive oil, then place it over the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster does not have healing power, it only serves to remove abscesses after cauterization and expel pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and papaverine poppy seeds; mix both and create a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortened method of plastering that facilitates the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining abscesses: use grated alum, chamomile and violet flowers, flour from ash, all in a quantity sufficient for one person. All of them are ground and some are mixed with wine if the member is not injured.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it has been injured, then soak that in wet colander water or water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering for faster resolution than the first one, when abscesses occur requiring limb restoration: use a mixture of alum powder and linseed oil, burdock root, poppy seed, clover flower, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all in equal parts. All should be ground and mixed with sauze water or double-strength water, or wine, according to the quality of the limb and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras, when not dissolved freely in its liquid form that is placed over the broken limb for restoration, should instead make a paste of wax and oil without any other cause; it's recommended to have a medium between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May it be observed that when Gualia is placed over the broken limb for restoration of its function, the causes leading to desiccation from quality such as myrrh, ashes and things similar to those we have mentioned are seen.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of plastering that helps with injuries and pain: use a mixture made from ash, hair removed from human bodies or horse hoof trimmings, and alum, in equal parts. It should be ground, sieved, and mixed to form the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount depends on how it is determined whether the inflammation has subsided and if there is no pain or pressure, nor a broken bone in its proper place, then you do not disturb the patient for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there occurs intense pain or swelling in the area, then you should remove it immediately, and keep his plaster on.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and a sea sponge that is wet, then immerse that in boiling water, and use that to wash the affected area until the pain and swelling subside; then let the limb rest for an hour; place on him wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil, and cover him with it until you are sure of a boil being cauterized, and that the swelling of the limb subsides, and alleviate his pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then iteratively apply that tightness and plaster without straining your first effort, and gently work on it until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you observe that the boil and the fever and the pain and swelling and all accidents have already subsided completely, and you need no more plaster or tightness, then continue applying this as you did at the beginning with equal measures.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause for the limb among those we have mentioned, then do not remove it but let it be for about three to four or five days; And some burns require that everything be left for twenty days according to your observation of the removal of pain in the limb, as we have said, during which the fracture adheres, and it comes close to the coagulation of the flesh over there.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the tightness more than in your first tightness altogether, and adjust according to the increase of the patient's food, as long as it is preceded by his recovery.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More so if you see that the fracture location has dried and tightened more than it should, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; hence, wash that area with boiling water for all burns; this must be done in total over three days; loosen the tightness a little, and through this operation supply nutrition to the limb, which gets healed slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And as those who restore fractures of the limb do another round when it is not restored to its original state, according to whether or not it has healed properly and according to the twist, this is an error according to their operation, and a great fear; if they were right, then those would have exaggerated in their ancient books and treated that open area.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I haven't seen any of them do this, so it's more reasonable to think that this doesn't happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Section two: About fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are blows, and their shapes are varied, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures occur due to impact from space, and this impact remains within the skull, which leaves the bones intact, similar to what happens in a rod, therefore this type is called intracranial; or the force impacts a part of the bone, and it also damages the flesh but does not penetrate into the inner part of him; and this type of fracture is called absolute lifting.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the outcome of these two types of fractures is either severe or slight. For fractures that are compressed or squeezed; and the cause for him is impact on wood or hammering onto stone, similar to this situation.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which approaches the inner part of the skull that leaves the bones intact; or it's in the surface of the bone. The outcome for these two types of fractures is either severe or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for the fracture that occurs within the bone, in the tiny subtlety of the hair-like structure; thus this type of fracture is called 'capillary'.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is the fracture that occurs due to impact or hammering on stone, which brings some layers of bone into the parts inside, and it happens in concave places like when they occur in hammers during impact; it's the part of their entry into the inside parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is predominantly caused by such incidents in moist bone bodies, like children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of fractured bones, they are like separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come back to the healing process of everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we must know all these types of fractures through detection on them and by inquiry into their various signs and symptoms of corrupted flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known by this that it's revealed on the bone surface and removed, and there's a trace left on him during which the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	And in the healing of fractures, consider the patient's condition, and then if you see these symptoms according to their obvious manifestation, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, loss of appetite, fainting, acute fever, smell disturbance, fever sweating, and manifestations of these symptoms in major positions, if so it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see abnormal symptoms, you expect recovery, then you start the healing of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This is the cause that if you have come across it at the beginning as it is injured and this happens during the winter months, then after studying in the bone's inner part before day fourteen according to any position.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it's during the summer days, then after studying until the seventh day that what is left inside the bone has been corrupted by the inner part, and that incidents occur as we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated to the brain, and is in small parts that are being separated and moved, then you should scrape the irritated area with small movements and rubbing, according to what I will advise you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you must cleanse the buttocks of the patient, and expose the bone according to custom and your manual skill, and as per the shape of the wound, and make it lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens that you need to determine the bone location, pus or abscess flow, then you must oppose yourself as per this method, and thus you fumigate the spot with oil that has been infused in vinegar and rubbed. You make the wound rest within until the abscess is numb, and ensure there are no blood flows; and afterwards start from around the bone circumference and towards its excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And you should proceed according to one of two ways for surgery.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you incise the bone with a straight blade scalpel, and this is its form: And then administer another scalpel of this type, slightly less than the first one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more of the longer scalpel than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And scrape that you must know how many different scalpel blades to use, among which some are longer than others; and some of them have shorter edges compared to others, with their tip being more acute. They should be made of steel or iron.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them for ease in striking the scalpel blades to avoid hitting the bone and causing damage there.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should pierce in front of where you will use the scalpel blades when you administer them on the grooves, which you call non-deep grooves.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called otherwise than those that do not reach the end of the bone test because it is close to them; so that at the groove there is a round extremity or edge near which the sharp tip of his head resembles an edge or a small circle, which should not be submerged and pass through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient for you to use many of these grooves, each one of which suits the thickness of any bone, within which there should be an acute extremity at all times when testing the brain, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the amount of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of grooves: The quality of piercing in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the groove on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the groove to another location, and leave behind the amount of thickness of the ray or roughly this.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you should incise with the scalpel that is between each ray of the bone, and make it slightly soft on this as shown when lifting, so like what we have said, while excavating the bone, or with your hand, or due to some other reason using certain tools that you will have adapted for this, such as forceps and delicate tongs.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure to exercise all caution so that the scalpel does not touch any part of the intestines.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have pierced the bone and separated it from the intestines if it continues with this, and extract it, be sure to place this in the roughness of what is on the bone as another tool resembling a scalpel, but indeed make it more precise and more delicate than the other scalpel blades.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any fragment of the small bones petrified and calcified, then take this with ease from among the tools you have; then treat the wound with remedies and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of surgery is simpler and farther from pain; it was taught by Gualia and through great praise. And this is the discourse about it: It is necessary for you in the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is more intense and more evident, within which when you have uncovered that part and placed its extremity of this scalpel slowly and happily, here is how:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And this is the case of the conical part which is thick and does not penetrate any organ, and the sharp part lies in two opposite directions in length, as you see; that the conical part fits to the intestines against its acute inclination on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you strike on the scalpel from one side with a slight force until you penetrate all the bone easily as it has turned, and you are sure of the inside that it does not hit in the accident that you fear in any way; indeed, if the doctor was urine for all people and the most ignorant among them; certainly, if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When any other cause is attached to the bones of the foot in certain places of the bones, that substance of his enters at the end of the incision into that lens-shaped object, and he will deliver it from him through ease, which is relieved of his suffering and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the foot, and whatever is detached or left of the bone is his skin, it enters him with sharpness and subtle prominences. In that case, smooth out that roughness and eliminate those fine prominences through the preparation you have made for them, using various quantities so that it may be possible for you to apply these in all places according to what they need, and administer the right pus from these following where your operation has gone on this broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you administer according to your judgement in which you prepare the bone at its beginning with this thick pus, and further use more of the fine pus from him, and do not cease performing this until you reach administering the thick pus and the fine pus from all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	When in any of the other small and fine capillary fractures or subtle fractures, make sure to administer care according to how you have proceeded with correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they do not heal over all those which have been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have demonstrated on what has been written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the foot is stretched when you remove the bone, then make sure to take cloth according to the size of the wound, immerse it in greased oil, and place it over the wound opening; and further take another folded or triple-layered cloth, immerse it in wine and greased oil, and place it over the first cloth; and when you administer a little pus on top of that, do not apply too much so as to not harm the skin. And then apply lime over that gently until the amount that corresponds to the wound is sufficient only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it like this under this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the pus being ready to be cauterized; and then remove it and administer medicines against excessive drying, such as lint cloths and flour from corns, and powders of earth and aristolochia, and those similar treatments.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And when you make these medicine powders into dust to apply on the wound, like dry ones; and universally, administer all medicine of its nature which repels without biting.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And follow your virtue according to the cleansing of the wound in your treatment; and it should not be greasy with ointment or any other substance; nor let you add toxicity to him; for when it is placed on the skin of the head, it spoils it and causes it to decay, which then spreads maliciously towards the foot from this evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it spreads in the skin of the head, as his bone changes and especially when treatment is neglected for him, where there appears a dark color on the surface. And thus consider that if accidents happen to the foot as we have said, you know that it is harmful from beginning to end.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not develop darkness but only due to the medicine that is placed upon it, and this darkness arises from the virtue of that medicine causing this darkness, then make sure to take a part of honey and parts of greased oil each being one-third. and draw these lines with a thread, and further place this over the skin; and treat it with the spices of healing that suit until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Third section.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On restoring the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into two parts simultaneously with excessive bleeding, or any of those cracked ones, because there are two bones in it, where your break leaves cartilage, and does not break him but causes irritation, awkwardness, and obstruction.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then make sure to insert your finger in his nose and adjust that break internally as you indicate with your finger, and place your finger's tip outside as well until the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this by yourself with ease, and make sure not to allow your operation to spread over the entire foot.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose with excessive bleeding, and your finger does not reach that area, then make sure to equalize at the tip of the ray where there is a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the break is in two parts, then you should mimic this procedure.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And take care in restoring him on the first day of the break, if it is possible; otherwise, wait approximately seven or half of the cauterization until you can resume.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert a piece of cloth with grease on the tip of the nose if the break is in one part, or two cloves, if it's in two parts, and put as much thickness in the clove to fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And follow the instructions of the ancient restorers that the cloves be immersed in butter, and be worn throughout the day, but they are not seen by me; make sure to immerse the cloth in egg whites like a sponge with powder from moly; then let the clove stay until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some cracks should be inserted in the nose instead of a clove, to avoid excessive bleeding that is wrapped with a lion's cloth around it; and if you already have a break in the nose that is strong and allows breathing for the foot.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this reason is not necessary for you; if you want, do this, if you don't want to, do something else.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another pus-filled boil occurs, cover the nose with a wet bandage or cloth, or soak them in warm water and olive oil, or use an herbal decoction.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	May it be that if no pus-filled boil occurs, then cover the outside with flour of basil and the powder of walnut shells; and place your hand over their footstop, and do not allow any cause to affect the nose.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	May it be that if you break the bones of the nose due to a small fracture or are instructed, then cover so that you divide over those, and remove them with instruments suitable for those; and place your hand on the cut, and heal that with what promotes flesh formation and consolidation, and apply plaster as is convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there arises a plague inside the nose, then cover so that you heal that with something else and administer lead tubes into it until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Capitulum. IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not infected, consider this: if the fracture is only external, and has not been broken into two pieces but is bent inward from the outside, then its intelligence is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is in the left mandible, then insert that indication of yours with the right hand; and push the internal hardness of the fracture inward to make it easier for parts outside, using your other hand from the part outside the jaw; do this properly as described.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two, then cover that you administer extension to both parts according to rightness while it is possible for its equality.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there arises a disturbance of teeth causing dislocation, then strengthen those you expect will break in filaments of gold or silver or wood; and place your hand on the broken jaw with a cloth, and place another piece of fabric over it, and lay that large star-shaped fabric properly, or one person equal to the length of the jaw; and place that above according to how you have observed the strength and what is suitable for application, while ensuring it does not get destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and suspend his diet for a few days.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that it has been altered in some manner, then take the treatment and untwist that on the third day; and correct what has already been altered about you and plaster those with basil powder, with egg whites, or with basil flour, provided you have prepared the dressing of your patient, and cover that with a woolen cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And once this plaster is set and the position of the jaw is not altered, leave it alone, do not untwist it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; as many marks to heal this fracture are strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another boil arises in the pus-filled boil, then administer what we have advised marks to heal in the cooling of your patient until it is healed, and make that boil larger again.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or stuck, then you need to distinguish which pieces are with what suits for their removal in the treatment of those disturbances.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the infection are strengthened, then you should expand them with a bloodletting needle according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finished those pieces and from them no further removal is necessary, then if the opening of the infection is large, cover that; otherwise, apply one of the plasters suitable for that and form that until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Capitulum. V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Marked marks indicate that the furcula at the front of the part has been broken through the muscle, and this fracture is made in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than by segments without causing segments; and this makes it easier for the restoration of it; or so that there are segments about you in it, making the restoration difficult; or so that the fracture is infected.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And in that operation, when the fracture is infected, you must have two ministers present, so one has the assistant and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck of the patient at that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And adjust the fracture with your thumbs until it is made in the form of its original shape according to what you cover, and do not leave any slight depression or concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then cover that you place some padding or wool under the patient's neck, and make its size according to the quantity of your need; extend and elevate the furcula and hold the pillow with your hand until you adjust the fracture according to what you observe.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the furcula to the parts outside due to it being stuck in the preon, then cover that the patient should be laid down on his neck, and place a hand half the size over the muscle of your patient.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses onto the muscle of the patient at the points where the base of the vertebral column is elevated compared to its surroundings, and then you correct the fracture and align it according to your instructions.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel sharp pains in the vertebral column and it disturbs you, then cut over that area and remove those pains with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is trapped in the bone, then you perform an incision on the patient using one of the incisives that you have donned for this purpose, as you previously laid out the vertebral column with such strength to serve the chest; and this is the shape of that tool:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is similar to a knife with this being its curvature; and its width according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or its fragility.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it depends on what is feasible for the operation; there should be two ends like this sometimes, and one end should be wide while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the tear in the wound that you have incised when removing the pain from the bone is wide after the extraction of the pain, and you are sure to expect an abscess, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suturing.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the tear is small, or you fear an abscess, then use the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the incision in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess should occur, then soak a cloth with vinegar and oil rubbed together, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the narrowing of the bone when it's in the wound and its section is that you place a plaster made of flour from mill mixed with albumen of egg over the stopa leon, and if you need more of that, then take a breath, which I have the Sarrazis, that should be long, and has width of your one palm or around that; and then cover that with multiple powders above the plaster; and also take a thin table stick whose width is three fingers and similarly in length; and then wrap that inside cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the table stick over the place on the fractured area; and finally press that down completely everywhere, and when times come for the narrowing of the fracture to have narrowing descent, and this should not be hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all, that the stick does not penetrate beyond the broken bone; and always cut so you see the back of the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or you notice the stick has hardened again, then you correct this and strengthen the ligament.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And also have the back of the patient rest on their neck, and place your hand on their back while they sleep in bed every night with this slightly elevated. So that under it is the support of their chest, thus lifting the fracture to its elevation level; or so their arm rests against the back of it.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not disturb the ligament if it doesn't happen more quickly or an abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And also renew the plaster when you've seen the face of it thus, and adjust in the narrowing, restore that and relax until it's restored and has been coagulated in the fracture of the vertebral column.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it's strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, treatments are done within that time period of someone.
Capitol .vi.	Capítulo VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Chapter 6: On the restoration of the shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is broken in the patient's left side and you do not break it from them, but rather the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the area of your patient is broken - and it's broken in the middle area of your patient - and it's not known otherwise but by touch, then according to how the fracture figure forces you, prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in all manner of skill which is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And also place on that area flour mixed with egg albumin and stopa leon; and place a double cloth powder; and place over the patient thin table stick according to the quantity of the spatula or more than a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May if you have placed the stick in some of the locations of the spatula and it is concave, then you adjust that concavity with stopa leon, and then place the stick according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And also strengthen from above with a long breath due to the descent of constriction and with tightening of the stick within not being hardened in its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and in all cases when it's softened, have another treatment and strengthen and equalize the stick if it has hardened in its location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Place the back of the patient on their chest so.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in twenty days or in thirty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you should know securely that that comes from the bones where it started is not feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you are dealing with the place of the bone pulse and put on the chain for it, then you divide over them, hold it, and do as we have said about the fracture of the vertebral column in case of abscess cautery if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot has some injuries that are ruptured in the middle part of it, causing pain here; however, its ends should not be injured as they are sensitive and easily broken.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And for the accidents of it, when its middle is broken, it starts leaking outwards and experiences great pain, difficulty in walking, and nausea; this is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be concealed from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on his back, with a cushion between their shoulders; they should press against their muscles and align their sides with the hands of two doctors, and delicately proceed in the operation according to all possible methods that suit this situation, ensuring it fits within the boundaries set by these methods. Once the bone has returned to its original shape as per its structure, then the procedure concludes.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and padding on it, covering it with a subtle table of wax or powder, as you wrap that in cloth; carefully adjust the application over the broken bone to ensure no pressure is applied; bind it according to its circular shape, strengthen that with a proper bandage; and consider the binding at all times, when it softens then strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it causes dislocation or percussion, or pain, or abscess that occur in the area, then you need to adjust and remove it, remove the plaster, correct whatever happens through this method of treatment; and reduce the plaster if necessary according to your technique; and adjust the bandage so that it is healing.
Capitol .viii.	Section VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Regarding the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You should know that a break in the ribs occurs only in large areas that span both sides; and at their ends on the front part, it doesn't occur due to friction with those because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And awareness that is not concealed from feeling, you should inquire about the pain associated with it under the touch.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you equalize the break under the touch according to possible methods, ensuring it aligns as per its structure, then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a table if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the break in the ribs is leaking outwards, then it causes intense pain and puncture, just like punctures occur with someone who has pleurisy, because the bones cause inflammation; it also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of stomach contents; and this makes it difficult to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Greeks are skilled at that through methods involving muscles.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say from them: take care when handling the belly that produces inflammation and wind, so the stomach is inflated and spread out, and the break is pushed towards the outward parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May it be that you do not allow this to cause a minor cause for generating pus in the cautery, if it doesn't happen; and if it already happens, then assist with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say that it should be placed on top of the windy area and pressed with strength; this is akin to reasoning but however, it's feared that the wind will throw away excesses due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say: take care that the area is covered with wool that is already immersed in cautery oil, and there are powders between the ribs while it's filled up, making the bandage equal to how you wrap it according to its circular shape; and ensure that the belly is treated with pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the constriction of the belly causes intense pain in it which cannot tolerate it, and the bone presses the skin due to punctured teeth, we are concerned about the belly; thus take care that you cut over the area, expose from the broken rib, then place an instrument under it that preserves the memory, which comes before toothache, and I will incise the bones with ease, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And adjust both edges of the wound if it's large with stitches and treat that with plaster until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if pus occurs inside, then you need to remove it and place powdered oil in the affected area, and treat the belly with this so that it heals from the pus inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And once healed, place them on their side where they sleep, until they recover.
Capitol .ix.	Section IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Regarding the restoration of a fracture of the vertebral column and the spine.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some injuries involve fractures in the bones of the neck, and there is also friction with them, similarly to those in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if such things happen to another and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider this: if their hands are already softened, numbed, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you pinch those with your fingers or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you should understand that it is not healing. In the states of dispositions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you hurt those and feel the constriction with your fingers and prick them, then you should understand that the neck of the bone is saved and that the belly heals with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see a resemblance to gout in their neck and want to know if they are diseased or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And when you notice that they have already been treated, it coincides with what happened in the hands. When someone lies on their back, there is a breeze and feces come out of their will, and sometimes they are relieved to lie down and then want to urinate but cannot; then you know that it's fatal, and thus you should not continue with their treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May it not happen that any cause of those exists, the cause is better and more minor.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of their condition is that you perform a cooling down on the cauterized boil where you make points over the neck, or at places between the shoulder blades; place a few points there every day until the boil's cauterization subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a piece of the plaster soothing and exuding, with pressure over it; and command the patient to rest and be calm, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that you need to remove the bone splinter or any cause already separated from them, then cut where the wound is and remove that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, stitch if it's large; then treat that with some ointment until they are healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	May it not happen that if the bone in the heel is broken, and it's the end of the leg, then cut where you insert your left hand's palm into the anus, and you break the broken bone with your other hand according to possible second-degree equation; then apply plaster and ash on it, if you need those, and adjust that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel bones broken inside them, then apply over that, and stay there, and treat the wound with the treatment that proceeds until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x. (This might signify "Chapter x" or a similar reference in medieval texts)
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of restoration of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those parts, and they are inscribed along the length and decline into the depths; it happens to the patient pain in that place and perforation, and the change is stupefied when there's a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of their condition is that you stretch your hand over it within which is about the fracture, which is the shape of that.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you adjust that according to what seems appropriate to you by equal equation until it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May it not happen if the fracture is in the long or that declines into the depths below, then you have to make the patient lie on their abdomen until your preparation for restoring that fracture is ready.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have adjusted that, apply plaster on it, then place an ash or a thread on it, and adjust with pressure over the area where don't fear perforation of the fracture nor movement of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And adjust the curvature with what fills that place until that accepts the pressure according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on one side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May it not happen that if there's a boil cauterization, then you cease the extension of them and their restoration until the boil cauterization subsides, and apply what soothes where is that according to what proceeds; then return to the restoration of them and adjust that accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens inside the bone splinters or are fragmented, then you take them out.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi. (This might signify "Chapter xi" or a similar reference in medieval texts)
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of restoration of the fracture of the assistant.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade, within the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of them can be in one of two ways, of which you take flat ash as follows:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if there are two ligaments at both extremities, then it should be suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on one elbow; and have them extend their broken arm over the pole until it reaches to their nipple in the middle, where the curvature of the pole is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And hang over that something heavy, or the doctor extends that to the depths below; and have the surgeon examine the fracture at their elbows' locations; and let the doctor treat the fracture according as he sees fit until the fracture returns.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient should lie on their neck and have their hand from the neck extended by one of them; and command two ministers, that one of them holds what is above the fracture at their elbows; and the other holds the pus below them; and each of them extends to their depth.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want that the extension be more forceful, then adjust your hand on the fracture and another ligament, and each of both ministers extends to their own depths.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then place half of the ligament over the nipple and the other part should be placed on the shoulder joint.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then cover that area and that knee with a cloth.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	After this has been done for convenience and the work is complete, then when it has been correctly covered according to application, strengthen it if an abscess does not occur through proper use.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs through the cautery, then after seven days, lay flat inside the wound, and place woolen thread on it in the middle for it to rest in the abscess area. Then strengthen that afterwards.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to strengthen that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a sheet of new fabric around the plaster; and adjust your arm on that support, and place your hand open on his muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the sheet and strengthen over the support of the arm so that the arm is in a place of stars, if not prohibiting any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture that star which is more dense and stronger than the others; and you place between each star the width of a digit, and the length of the stars according to the breakage with an addition of three digits from all directions.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen on top of the stars am the band which I mentioned at the beginning of the head.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your band over the spot of the fracture be more strengthened.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as much as she lengthens, the fracture's band becomes smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you measure the position of the stars and the band as we have said when restoring the member to its original position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess through the cautery, then after laying flat the band and the stars for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all directions for three days so that it does not occur at the place of pain or inflammation; or prevent food from reaching the limb due to excess stiffness; and correct all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are confident that no cause will arise from this, then do not release the bandage for at least three days or longer.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's back sleep on his bed, and his hands be on his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the support a full bed of evenly placed wool, and consider at all times of night or day that no distortion nor dissolution of the figure of the broken limb occur, or that the ligament is softened; then correct this completely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And let the food of the patient according to the order which we have prescribed before mealtime, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until strengthening starts; then cover what thickens the food for him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	That the strength of the support and the patient's leg lasts for forty days is customary; then cover that they are released and bathing and medicinal ointment is administered, which correct those things.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture has been rubbed off, then do not release that ligament and stars for another day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii. (This is likely an indicator for Chapter XII in a larger work, but without further context it's hard to provide more detailed translation.)
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is made of two bones which are called two forearms; among them one is small and it's the one that breaks what we call 'the wrist', and the other is large and it's the one that rests on top of the smaller one at the part further above.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if only the larger forearm is broken or both together are broken, and they break simultaneously.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when only the smaller forearm is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is much more so.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fracture is below the smaller forearm, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm above, then it's convenient for the doctor to restore it, you should make a small extension so as not to overstretch when that is equalized.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If it's the larger forearm that is broken, then cover that you should place a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forearms are broken simultaneously, then cover that you should perform the extraction much stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And cover that you should restore the shape of the hand and extend its reach on a cushion, and let the wrist be at the top of all other digits, more so than when you count them, and the heel of the foot be two-thirds above one laid flat.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion in front of it at the height or position of the foot, so that the heel does not hinder work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let the minister extend his arm from the part further above towards his hand or on the ligament, and another minister extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And let the doctor equalize the bones so that he shortens it according to the best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are deformities in the bone structure, then you should reduce all parts to their place by your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears in him separate deformity that is piercing the vein and not in your hope for restoring him, then you should fix on him and hold it according to the method which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is due to disease, I have already dealt with that particular case, and therefore take care of treating it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess appears during your recovery process, then you should apply a cloth soaked in rotted oil and white wax, between firmness and subtlety, and tightly cover that with a sheet where the abscess can drain; and afterwards replace the bandage and apply a plaster made of clay powder from turmeric, and add stars; and let this star be placed over that fracture just a little bit lower and much stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the name of the star on the arm is shown in major positions, or whether the fracture is single or in two together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And place your bandage firmly on the spot of the fracture strongly and powerfully, and when it is more suitable for the tightening towards the upper parts of the fracture or towards the lower parts of it, place the bandage a little wet depending on how well you remember it in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the sheets that you wrap around the fracture should be wet and soft, not hard or abrasive. The wax on which it is strengthened should be of their own proper middle between subtle and coarse, as we have recounted.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the joint for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as the pain that occurs in the limb itself, then immerse the limb in cold water until that pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb rest without strain until it recovers, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the swelling has already subsided and the bone has healed to those extents, then correct all of this using your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess bandaging. Then immerse it so that you slightly relax that for a little while and let it rest for some days until blood flow returns to that area, then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if nothing like the causes we have mentioned happens to the patient, then do not immerse him for about 20 days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And let the doctor's hand be suspended from the patient by his strength of vigorous movements, and have him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored within xxx days or xxxii days, or somewhat weaker is restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the limbs and the positions of strength.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Regarding the restoration of fractures of the thumb of the hand and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	And know that in the thumb of the hand and joints of the fingers when there is a fracture, it does not happen to them but only bruising due to movement.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is fracture or bruising in the hand, then you should let the patient lie down facing forward and place their head slightly above them according to equality, and then place the hand on that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And let the minister extend the broken bones, and the doctor adjusts those so that they fit into good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then immerse it with plaster and wadding, if there is no abscess. And place the star according to the amount of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth of theirs.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the crunching is inside the hand towards the palm belly, then make it resemble a bell of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with their bent palm; let this be strengthened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the star of the heart be on a cloth in which it floats, so that the heart is applied to the palm; strengthen this according to how you see fit.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is on the outside parts, then you should place over the star and another star of that part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then place the bandage, as when the hand is turned towards the heel among joints with fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, if it's just the joint, then adjust according to how you see fit and let this be strengthened with the palm, and if you want, place your small star upright so that the fracture is elevated and not hindered.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in the other fingers, like in that middle area or on the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be level and parallel to the finger where its base is; or they are all level according to continuation, which is better; or place a small star over that spot, as we have said for the joint.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your recovery and nearby, the position of an abscess, oppose - in your operation - with what you command when any cause arises from those circumstances, according to what we have recounted.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Regarding the restoration of fractures of the bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is broken due to movement causing bruising, and it is declared by feeling as it turns towards the front and above.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of this is done so that the joint over the fracture and other joints not affected by the fracture are strengthened, and the patient lies down on their belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then, according to quality, the minister extends all the ligaments to their part when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is close to the knee joint line, then this ligament is positioned near the shin bone at the knee part, so that the extension fits in them, and another ligament leaves the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is close to the shin bone, then this ligament is made close to the shin bone, and the extension is left at the parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor equalizes the bone on both of his hands so that it reduces according to natural shape and the bone is joined by good connection; then you should cover with a plaster and bandage, if not causing pus formation in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	And if pus occurs in him, then you leave it for some days until the pus is cured, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging of his limb should be done: cover the fracture with a hard wrap, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess from him; then enclose the joint up to the knee line.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the knee and its adjacent joint near the shin bone at the parts left, making the ends of the needle reach over the shin from both sides, then rotate around the joint and knee area until excess wraps are removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place star-like points on the knee in that fracture area, and place one of those points above the bone at the joint.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the gaps between the knee and thigh with thick cloths, so that the bandage can clot.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And start with a strong bandage in the middle over the fracture area using three or four layers, and as you move further away from the fracture site, your bandaging should be smaller, lighter, and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend both ends of the needle to the parts left until it reaches inside the chest cavity, strengthen both ends of the stars from the other side to ensure that the ligament does not shift out of its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And lay the bandage over it so that no harm occurs to the limb, neither infection nor pus formation from the needle nor swelling; and if any cause arises from these, then you should treat him immediately, and rectify whatever happens as closely as possible according to what we have discussed many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is space inside it where you can place something, then cover so that you equalize that according to what is possible for you; and if not, treat him on this without placing anything and cure from whatever precedes the memory until he is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this knee fracture is strengthened like the other ones adjusted to your stars, as we have said in the guide and on the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, during the restoration of the knee in this manner, it does not cause limping in the patient; and if restored alone, as when you apply the other joint, then it is necessary that the knee stop functioning due to its condition.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the knee is strengthened in about 10 days or a few months, all this according to the variety of conditions and other treatments.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the shin bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	And know that fracture of the shin bone is very difficult, but occurs in many occasions through violence.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if it occurs to the fracture, then it is merely a crack or rupture in its parts, and on this whole it is stated according to feelings.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its parts within those, is added and joined according to the possibility for harmony, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place a plaster and a round star on it if you need that one; strengthen above with bandaging as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, such as pus formation from the needle and similarity to those, so that it opposes every event according to what is convenient for him until he is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the joint.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	And know that in the joint are two bones, one of which is thick and named as the joint; and the other is delicate and named easily.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it occurs with the various types of fracture as it does for both bones in the arm, so its restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken simultaneously, the joint changes in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, the joint is changed towards the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thick bone is broken, find it out yourself, and these are causes that you do not know.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, harmony, and ligament according to this equality.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	And yet consider, if the fracture of the joint is distant without any specific symptoms, that extension be mild and lighter, and aid with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the chest is sometimes a cause for operation on the arms, and that's when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation, then you take weights of wood ashes which are placed under the causes which were placed in ashes, and they are made by intertwining palm branches; remove those to which a small coarseness applies, and do not let there be any smudges on their hands, and let the length of those match the length of the chest, and from the ash pit leave them.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop each fold in two coverings according to the length of them, and place one over the chest part from one side and the other part from the other side, and have their place within the ash pit under a spot on the chest.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two stars at three points of each extremity and in the middle point. With this structure, movement of the chest is prevented from bending to the right or left side, and it stays in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a handful of ashes according to the length of the chest has been administered; and let the chest be placed such that it preserves this amount of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And primarily ensure you do this in a fracture, and when with that is the proper disease.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And primarily consider the chest in each day and study with that by subsequent study, and you keep it free from abscesses and swelling or from other similar causes; and whenever any cause of those occurs, then place yourself with that which contains to make it healthy.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	About the fracture of the tibia and the bones of the chest and fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	About the tibia, it does not happen to have a complete fracture; but with the bones of the chest, several instances do occur; and with the fingers of the chest, few fractures happen, and they do not happen to them unless there is some predisposition in the months.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the chest and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient places their chest on the prepared ground like this so that they can move.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on the area that is elevated from those bones, and then press those, apply pressure, and equalize those within which I turn at the spots.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply plaster and cover above it, and place under him a small table on which there are two cushioned heads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that area of the chest with a descending structure, because you have enveloped that with cloths and with other causes from which you need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days pass for him, then you loosen the bandage, and there you will find the bones equalized, or they are broken or dislocated, and the operation is as known with that.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If any fingers are broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I have advised you on the restoration of fingers in the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger with a star according to the length of the finger, and let there be just a little more space for him; and then place your chest on this table which has been recommended to you, and strengthen that area with a descending structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a star of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the chest, and let there be standing over one of the table's heads so that you can reach his abdomen for good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget that you should not consider all the causes which I have mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and be with yourself with whatever comes.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	About the fracture of the thigh bone in women and the bone in the knee and the penis in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone in women is broken, then make that lie down on its side, and then incline that slightly towards one side, and keep it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife raises her hip in the thigh bone, and does it like she expects on that bone; and keep the woman bent, and elevate each of her legs little by little, so that all this is outside as expected with the thigh bone facing forward and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, raise her hip for ease, and let her urinate, and return that according to the method in which she was mixed at the beginning, and then return to her initial powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or about that time until that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an ovine bladder and strengthen over her lower back with a straw tube; and insert the entire bladder into her thigh, and then blow through the tube with force so that the bladder inflates inside her thigh, which is when the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be covered with hip and stay for several days as we have advised, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone in the knee of men or women is broken, then administer and restore that which we have advised on the bone in the thigh.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is correct is not concealed in these nearby fractures for few occur, especially to him who has some study and understands my free discussion; because that fracture means for you in the major ways of directional movement during restoration and shaping, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the urine in the bladder is drained, grab it from above, and place the bladder into that; then, place your hand over the patient's abdominal wrapping, wrap them up, and let them be wrapped for three days or about that time. Afterward, they will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when there is a plague.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one to whom bone fracture happens with the plague, and much more so if the bone is large like that of the knee or of the leg assistant, or similar to that, where you take care of and use bloodletting there immediately if the conditions for bloodletting are present or can be ascertained in this way, as we have already said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague discharges pus, then take care to keep the area clean that you powder with it on the third day, if there is no other cause for concern.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong this treatment, if no abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess occurs with bloodletting, then you allow the restoration of him within the ninth day, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach him even on the third day altogether, for which you will cause other harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone is prominent over an exposed seam, then take care to pierce it and reduce that so as to make it even with your own hands and facilitate less extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not within your preparation and the alignment of him with your own hands, then you reduce that with your own hands to this tool; and this tool which is made of iron, its length being seven or eight dits, and its width according to the size of the plague; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of these depending on what he needs in treatment for all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and in the slight roughness for so that it does not bend, you must compress upon it during the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have an acute extremity with edges on its own extremities; and the color of him is always tending towards redness, and in the heart of him within the divisions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how he looks:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is named in Greek "running out of the harness", thus it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So take care that the elevated end of him faces upwards compared to the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that into a narrow passage until the bone returns and it is made even with some alignment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore force to make the ends of the fracture match each other, and if the broken end is delicate, and does not take that tool for good access, then take care that you insert the tip of that bone into a place where the instrument has power over this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone to this extent that we have recommended, then cut it with those scalpels which we have mentioned; or cut it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then sharpen that which rests on the surface of the rough and small bones.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And as the bone is reduced, and during this reduction the patient experiences intense pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and thus give him a good rest thereafter.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	As your restoration to the bone is completed, then immerse cloth in strong black vinegar, and especially if it's summer, do not apply ointment or any other cause near the wound with oil, so as not to cause him redness and heat.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stints in the time of your completion of restoring the bone, and leave the wound exposed until you shave it with scrapers and use bandages depending on the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take care to use all caution not to strain the wound over the fracture, as these are the errors that doctors have made in this, and they cause harm or corrosion of organs or severely ill, so it is health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your tightening is slight, soft, different from the tightness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear those harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and you find pain in that area, then do not take care to pause with those stints over him, but apply with those hard cloth bandages instead of stints and strengthen him with that.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And as the wound begins to heal within one or two days, that when him has produced a scab, then you remove the bandage which you had applied over it with vinegar, and then administer ointments, greases which according to our custom heal wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it has consolidated and closed, and take care that the redness runs from him towards the divisions left with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes through days, and is not consolidated or can be peeled off of him with a scab, then know that here are maggots because you should always seek to remove the scab from this.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those secretions that are separated and removed, those that are not separated and cause pain when the body is moved, you should puncture them according to whether it is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens that they are pus or ichor, these are inflammatory processes or forms of decay and putrefaction; then you should follow the advice for each one according to which suits the treatment of their healing, with a detailed explanation preceding this in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from this which you cover with the most effective method: when the hard lump is broken and drained, press on the body in the same way as if it were like the bone of the thigh or the support, resembling those found among large muscles; do not presume to be causing injury, nor expect the extraction of any swollen spots through this will lead to death; lay that flat inside where you can place it, so that over time, within approximately 20 days or one month, it will drop out on its own. And then treat the wound if you have seen it, and if not, leave that as it is.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of a lump that occurs in the residue of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These lumps occur this lump in the residue of fracture healing, especially靠近 the joints, and is rubbed by its member to form the figure of the limb; and forcefully prohibit the use of the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the lump is recent and administer medicines that have a stimulating effect like aloes, rhubarb, lime water, vinegar, and oil, all of which resemble these; choose some or all of them, and take those with a stunting effect, or those with white milk, or those with astringent properties, and place this over the lump in a poultice, and apply those to it for proper constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And apply constriction without allowing the lump to relax for several days; then remove this and repeat with another until the lump has become more firm; or place a lead sheet over it that descends, as lead has the property of making anything inflated within limbs smaller.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May if the lump has already turned yellow and been expelled, and if it's necessary to cause an eruption at the location, then divide this pus superior part of it, and remove the excess or drain it into some nostrils until it becomes firm; and treat this while it is healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored, and you should treat the limb gently not according to its natural disposition.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and you should treat the delicate limb with care not according to its natural disposition; this is not done merely by chance: among these causes are: an excess of lymph solution and ligament realignment that does not occur as it should during healing; or due to excessive constriction of the ligaments where nourishment for the limb is prohibited from flowing; or due to an excess of ointment; or due to excessive movement before its time; or due to weakness in the patient's body and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to reduce the patient, make their body tender within which strength multiplies in them; and give baths; and introduce nourishment, joy, and comfort on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place the poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws nourishment to it, or continue applying the patient's ointment with hot water until nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of fractured bones that are restored in a tortuous manner, and you should prohibit the operation for what is involved.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it occurs in the limb that has already been restored regarding its healing of tortuosity and prominence at the broken bone and lump, and due to this deformation of form of the limb; however, the limb should not be prohibited from its natural operation, so you must take into account that the term for that member is of new broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	There are already many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly disapproved as it leads to great fear of the sign which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If there is weakness and lump are recent, then they should be wrapped in hot water in which softening herbs such as mint leaves and parsley, etc. are soaked; and it should be applied to the person with a bandage of softening; or if raw meat extract from parsley is taken and mixed with mule fat, and that is applied; or if lard balls are pressed and wrapped in goose feathers or mixed with olive oil, and this is applied; or if dried figs are used and pressed into the form of dough, etc., all similar to those medicines known as consolidants.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times are dissolved with constant light rubbing that is applied to the wettest ones, and full movement of the limb should be given in all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If tortuosity has already passed and been done forcefully and turned yellow and caused it necessitates treatment of it with iron, then you should drain the pus above the rupture and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and this should be applied that is excess from the lump under the bone with thin scissors, and facilitation should be provided in that with concern and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Regarding the discourse on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some joints in their place, preventing movement; it causes distortion of the body's limbs figure, bringing about significant pain and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly to reduce it and do not delay in reducing it; if it's delayed, the limb gets swollen and strengthens, making it difficult to perform the reduction of dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, do not allow it to swell or stretch during the process of swelling, as tense muscles cause convulsions and sharp pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, it is necessary to take care of the patient's flaccidity on the bed, and leave it in place so that he rests with swelling; and have the limb soak in hot water and oil, then reduce it as easily as possible.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be treated with what is due to its natural recovery at its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already organized the chapters on dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from the body's upper part up to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So if the two jaws are dislocated and they don't twist; and the dislocation of both is performed according to two methods: either they are partially relieved from their places by a small movement and become somewhat softer, or they are completely dislocated and completed, in which case they are softened within the joint where saliva flows out of the patient's mouth and it can neither hold onto that nor close its mouth, and the tongue is enveloped inside its own shape.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is minor, then in the larger positions it returns by itself due to a small cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	And when the dislocation is complete and full, it must be that reduction of it is administered lightly, and it should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the servant has the head of the patient, and the doctor places his one hand on the site of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, should the dislocation be from one part; or he puts both his hands at once, if it's a dislocation from two parts, and the others' commands are outside against which they are equal; command the patient to stop moving his jaws and go away from every part; and the doctor makes the jaw equal and inserts the jaw into its place so that it returns to its location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, especially when both jaws are always dislocated at once, then administer diaphoresis with hot water and oil, so that a slight reduction of both can be done without delaying the total reduction of both as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place on those powdery substances of lint as cerot, and it must be made of wax and oil rubbed; and have it held with ease at the soft parts.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And the patient should sleep on his back, with his head between two pillows, so that it doesn't swell at either the right or left side; and don't force him to eat anything against his will; have his food be forbidden for a lion, until the pains are somewhat softened and the jaws become numb, then allow him what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and don't work on the opening of the mouth for food and drink and ventilation until the jaw is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in any hour and have not returned to their usual positions, then convulsions often occur causing fevers and excessive perspiration, and strongly cause the patient's stomach to become inflamed, and strongly cause colic-like vomiting of undigested food.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you perform this treatment, then know that it is a loss; and convulsions kill the one to whom such happens within three days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Regarding the reduction of dislocation of the sternum and tip of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not dislocated inside the chest due to its continuity with the ribs; and some convulsions are dislocated outside of this place, which is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And place your palm over the area with firm pressure so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place plaster and powder on it, press firmly on it, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	And the tip that is connected to it continuously, does not get dislocated in any day; so you must reduce and equalize it according to what we have said and according to your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place plaster over it, and powder, and traction, and command the patient to rest and recovery within which they heal.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this kind of treatment, the tip of the muscle is reduced when it's separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Regarding the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any other way than three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the root of the tendon to the origin point.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it's dislocated at the insertion point of the muscle, and this occurs by traction; it's not dislocated at the back parts behind the shoulder; and it's not dislocated at the front parts in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it's dislocated and displaced outside at the insertion points behind the tendon, especially in those with few muscles, only slightly dislocated; more so in those with many muscles, it gets pushed out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And quite often, it happens to some people due to impact or jolt, and the muscle of them gets inflamed by a bruise or burn, and is dislocated because of this.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, when you treat it by considering that you are overburdened with them, then proceed in the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And you will know the dislocation when it's at the insertion points behind the tendon; thus, you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the muscle soreness, which you find among those with obvious diversity; and you discover in the head of the muscle concavity and behind the tendon where your hand touches the head of the muscle as if one were to grasp it, and at the bottom, it cannot return his hand to its own elbow, nor that part much by all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it's dislocated behind the feet or around them, then you will find it quite palpable, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, a slight reduction is made when it's fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to the top parts; then places your feet under the tendon of him, and elevates the joint with strength in its place, the minister raises the hand of him and extends that one there; then holds it so that she returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if for what we have said it does not return, and it's due to the duration of the dislocation, several days later, you should know that the patient is soaked in hot water and administered a salve that soothes and lubricates like a mixture as if it were a decoction of high essences, fennel, and dill in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be laid on his back and placed under the tendon of him with a cushion that's equal in softness and tension, and the doctor places his arm over the ball, and raises the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the hand of the patient so it doesn't get hurt at the insertion points, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so it doesn't get hurt at the insertion points; when that one almost returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stands on his side of that slope, and inserts his muscle under the tendon of the patient and raises the tendon up to the top parts inside where the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the insertion points of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is slight, then you should know that it's due to another cause being suspended, thus considering that severe one, for the dislocation returns immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it's reduced slightly according to another manner: and that you place in the ground a long rod whose tip is round in shape, like a mortar pestle, which shouldn't be thick or thin, then place the patient on top of this rod; because laid on this rod, the patient wraps a lion skin around its head, the patient stands according to the length of the rod, and then extends his hand from the insertion points of the other side; and stretches the body of him from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of him is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this treatment: and that you take a rod whose length equals two arms, and its width should be four digits, and the thickness of it should be like an arm's circumference according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place lion skins on the round head so that the rod doesn't press the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient under the tendon of him, and extend his hand or arms over the rod inside the insertion points, and keep the rod on the elbow and arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place his arm on a ladder according to its width, and his hand is extended from the insertion points, and the other side of him hangs from the other side, so that the joint comes back slightly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the process of him is completed according to any manner that's possible for you, then you should place under the tendon a padding of wool of equal quantity; and then apply prepared plaster with powder of moli on all parts of the muscle, as it gets mixed above, and then strengthen the tendon in tension gradually; and then mix the plaster over it, and his hand is attached to the neck, and it's left undisturbed, and the patient's hand should not be hurt for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And you should know that the diet of the patient should be light, during which time the member is comforted, as it's more beneficial for his recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And so, the food should be given more to seven or five and exercise is conducted with movements; and if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that affects it or by other causes, then in that area, a three-pronged cautery should be administered as mentioned in the section on cautery in the chapter.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this has been done and seven days have passed and the joint is relieved but the joint itself is not closed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over some burns on it, but it is not closed and swollen, and it cannot lift that arm to the upper parts, then you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	After the dislocation of that which is caused by the foot or the back, or parts behind, the reduction is done with pressure and extension on the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another stricture should be administered in that area, and treat it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is a significant healing delay in the limb and tardiness in its movement, then the patient should use warm baths between treatments until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Chapter 27: On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, but mostly towards the front and back. The dislocation of it cannot be hidden from you even when you examine it closely by touch or upon examination as per any figure of its dislocation. And when adjusting the dislocated shoulder, to your statement it is made manifestly clear that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch upon its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And look to the shoulders, and reduce the dislocation as soon as you reach the pocket of heat with your cautery. If it reaches that pocket of heat, reduction is difficult for it, and one is not fully healed; especially when it's in the parts behind, which is worse than all other types of dislocations, and causes more pain, so burning points are fatal to that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, which is possible to reduce when your hand is extended towards two more, and your arm is expanded, and the doctor's fingers are on the shoulder and you place it back onto them, and you push the joint with the heels of his/her own hands or in the center of their palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the forward parts, then it returns as such that you bend your hand towards his/her own hand, while percussing the shoulder in the center of their palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that is that two ministers extend the arm, and have that stretching by themselves so that it is not reinforced against the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then revolve the arm completely in all directions, because it is enveloped with a folded long cloth around their hand or abdomen.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, apply oil to that for it to be those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint and make it easier; then push the joint with vigorous pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction of it should be placed upon that plaster where stiffness and elasticity are found in egg white, and stretched on the stricture descent, and the arm should be hanging from the neck, and left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be released; and if the joint has formed in its place, you release the muscle from him/her and let that rest.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you repeat the plastering and muscle, and let that rest for a few days until it is stretched; and then release that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if there is heaviness around the reduction of the joint and its position is in motion, then you administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, with compression, until it is relieved; or rest upon the joint on a bed of soft hair; and then bind that, and let it rest over the bones during the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then stay that way, and keep him/her in baths; and when it's cleaned, then you rub the joint with seasoned friction, and then repeatedly apply this on that area, using a mixture of honey, once, then again, and finally the third time.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already penetrated into the inner part of the anus, within its limits.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, rest on that wet and scorched opening with fat and strengthen above it; do this several times, where that is wet and reduces to its usual position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Chapter 28: On the treatment of elbow dislocation, concerning the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Elbow dislocation of the hand happens occasionally, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. However, for other joints, the opposite applies: speed is required in reducing it while it's happening, before the pocket of heat appears or when there is a pocket of heat with cautery.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the wrist joint of the patient on a table and have him extend his arm, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the verge of the joint, and pushes it in so that it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it may be considered that if the palm is already in the abdomen of the arm, then the patient should place his two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation was anterior, then both of his arms are naturally positioned on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that verge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns straight away, that is good; and otherwise, then strengthen it until the pus yields under pressure of the point and leave him alone; and do not insist with this, because if you don't, no suffering or discomfort will arise in your reduction of him as long as pus passes into him.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, let the joint be manipulated according to its curvature; and do not blame the patient for any cause, since his hand is softened and cannot be made to suffer any cause; then you know that the nerves are injured or broken, and so there is no need in him but to strengthen it with a cautery near the site of the injury and make him endure this without suffering any cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the malaise has returned, then place on him the pressure which we have recalled, and leave him and strengthen him for about three days; and afterwards let it be released and leave him alone, and exercise his hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if the movement of him remains and happens in him with some gravity, then ease that with warm water and with friction for a few times, within which it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some remedies cause dislocation of fingers in every direction.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one finger is dislocated from those on the back of the hand or in the belly of him, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your fingers, so that it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And afterwards hold the tip of the finger, and by suspending him you should let off the part where it is dislocated, and leave him alone for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And afterwards suspend him and extend him until his right is equal to him in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, lie him according to that narrative, and do not cease rolling him in the day and exercising with movements, and lie him at night; and do this for a few days until he is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And pretend as if it is so, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and lie him to that part and do this with your first operation, until he is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulders.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens with any of the shoulders or neck dislocations and so we aggravate the wounded shoulder parts, then in that case there is no cure, for death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the elimination of the patient from his will is externalized, and he cannot retain that; or some remedies soften certain limbs or both sides of him or two arms of him, or one of those; or they aggravate a shoulder in its place, for aggravating remedies are used and aggravating remedies result in moving those four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And that has already been aggravated to the back parts it is called glibozitat.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of him is that then you need to consider if the glibozitat happened during childhood, for in that case there is no cure nor healing of it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	And in that which happens through trauma or by impact or similarly to those, the Old Ones would say that the methods of treatment are lengthy; but I return shortly from this. But I have abbreviated it from the one about him because of his too much length, due to my proximity to its middle exposition and at which I explain this in various instruments from him, where I show this and abbreviate him.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in glibozitat which happens to the leg parts in his feet, there is no need nor healing of that; and similarly with that which happens on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only those are cured that happen in his two (shoulders) as I have recalled.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient should be extended on his face over a pillow approximately level with the wall, and that he be extended until his limbs are moistened in order that his feet not be hindered.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a stick straightly, fixed in the ground at the end of the pillow near his head, and another stick vertically on the feet of him at the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And have the minister hold the stick, and do not make it firm in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around his head and leave the whiskers of lion firmly on him; extend the end of the mane to the stick which should be under his head, and lie that with him; and strengthen the other piece of cloth over his buttocks and the ankles of him, and direct his legs towards the other stick which should be underneath his feet; and then adjust all the cloths and lie those on the other stick which should be under his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the surgeon extends his instruments to the beginning of the leg, and does not mix the two legs and the muscles in their places where they are stuck, but rather does not make them as firm as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the surgeon places his hands on the spine with strength so that it returns, or places one hand on that side and near that place he sets a table, and adjusts his feet under the table as it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it doesn't return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is about three fathoms, and dig into the wall where we said that there's a place under the patient where the end of the table fits.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the end of the table on the spine, and the surgeon places his feet at the other end. He strains until the spine is squeezed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open both sides where they twist on your hand; and which ones you want to place in the ground must have the head of the patient at the back of the bed of two legs, the length of which is one span, and you need to place his head at the back of the same bed of two legs. And make sure that there's a space of about one palm between each leg, and this should be done in each leg when you pull them towards where they twist, and each one must be firmly set on the ground so as not to move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make another leg stand where your body is, and twist it in the two pulls of both legs.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of this is a pull where the leg forms, whose length is one span as it is twisted; and in the other two legs it's like this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strain the muscles you've stretched in the feet of the patient on this pull, and the muscles you've stretched in their thighs on that pull where you place their hands.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And each turn should have one attendant who twists the turn with their hand, and the surgeon adjusts the spine according to what we've said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine has returned and the area is adjusted, then apply an excretory poultice made of albumin from goose liver, and stop. And place it on the poultice until a table surface fits in which its width measures three inches or about that, and its length matches the depth of the fatty area, and over the part of the spine there.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply to the muscle that we said, use the patient's subtle nourishment so it can heal.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any remaining concern in the area at the end of the healing process, then prepare medicines that soften and cleanse before the table administration for a long time, which we have recommended; and this lead sheet has already been administered in that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And there are some worries that occur at the end of the spine in both sides, and they cause concern due to that dislocation; and this is an area which already troubles you so it's not appropriate to think of giving him this medicine, which will lead to his death happening.
Capitol .xxxi.	Section Title: XXXI
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Regarding the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that only the joint of the thigh bone and the joint of the muscle should not experience anything other than dislocation, and things do not happen to them as they do with other joints that have small movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the thigh can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated internally, or externally, or anteriorly, or posteriorly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mainly it is dislocated internally, and rarely externally or posteriorly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation towards the internal side is that when you adjust the healthy leg to the leg, it becomes longer, and the backside (possibly referring to a measurement or feature related to the dislocation) is more prominent than in the healthy state. The leg cannot bend its knee due to which it has to be held with its hand, and the joint where it is supposed to be held without causing any pain indicates that the inside of the thigh bone (or possibly part of it) has been affected by this condition.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign for the one to which accidents happen in dislocation is when his incidents are against this incident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign for the one to which accidents happen in dislocation towards the front is that he extends his inner thigh according to completion, however, it does not bend that pain that's at the back, and if it is pushed forward it can't proceed further inwards. His urine is retained and he becomes immobile; you should have him walk on his toes.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign for the one to which accidents happen in dislocation towards the back is that he doesn't expand his back side nor can he bend that part forward as if it were bent backwards; his inner thigh is shorter than the other one, his mobility is reduced, and the head of the leg bone should be at this spot.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider. So, if the dislocation is old and long-lasting, having already been treated with a certain approach for some time, then upon reconsideration of this treatment, it may be applied according to its current state, which means not applying excessive force; consequently, there's no need to think about another intervention in that case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	When it comes to the one whose dislocation is recent, and this is one of the four types of dislocation, then you guide yourself towards what will return the joint and extend that within the parts inside and the parts outside, and move it to the right and left, where strength lies and no other cure is required.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it doesn't return in this manner, then you should prepare yourself to apply force and extend the patient's muscle from that particular part or at their chest, or directly on what is lying above the muscle under the skin; and another person should extend their hand over there where they can place their hands. And firmly press with your strength against the bone of the thigh, and have another person hold tightly onto the end of the muscle.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And whether it's an extension of the patient or inside part towards the knee joint in the thorax region, or behind part towards the back side.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it's the extension of all those in one go where the patient is lifted up to their height of the earth and hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and otherwise, then for every type there needs to be detailed instructions on its own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is inside the parts, you should have the patient lying on their back. And place the muscles over the bone of the thigh in that area which lies between the head of the thigh and the location where the knee bends; and extend the muscle from the side of the knee joint to the other part of the thorax.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another person should firmly take the arms of the patient, press hard on the fat region under the thigh, and extend towards the outside parts with strong extension, where that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type allows for a lighter treatment in which this member is reduced compared to the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you are excused and do not comply with this treatment method for all, then you should have the two thighs of the patient together under strong, gentle pressure on both hips and both knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each is as much as four fingers, and the thigh extends further than the other by two finger widths.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the thigh be suspended from the head of the shaft and in the hand; and let the length of that on the ground be as much as two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong youth to pinch the head of the thigh and suspend it on another young person's thigh; and let the other youth press the thigh with intense strength where that returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	When it comes to the reduction of itself, if dislocation occurs outside the parts, let the thigh press on the ground as we advised in the yellow book; and strengthen the muscle over the thigh properly and over its feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two shafts, one on the foot of the patient and the other on the head; and place two adjusted shafts in the middle of the buttocks under which wet cloths are wrapped to prevent the thigh from getting damp where the shaft is between the thighs, so that you can extend the parts left and right without being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each person should extend to their part, and the doctor holds the reduction according to the art with their hand.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if you comply with the reversal, it will be greatly beneficial; and otherwise, hold on to that carefully and do as we have said in yellow book for that equality.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And let the thigh press against their knees gently.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in front of the parts, then let the muscle be gently extended, and according to this half of the story about the shaft; and the doctor holds the palm of their right hand on the thigh of the patient, and presses that against the other hand, and with that pressure holds that extension towards the sides away from the back part.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is behind the parts, then do not let the thigh be extended to the sides left and right, but lifted onto the ground; at that time let it be placed on a hard cause, as one does with lying when its width is dislocated outside in the position of lying on two widths, as we have said about lying of them on two widths; and let it be over their face and muscles be extended, as we have said, almost entirely.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let there be applied compression on the table at the place where the joint is laid.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then as the reduction is completed according to this - and the sign of the reduction on you is not hidden, that being when you extend the thigh in both directions. And when you make those equal movements and the thigh stretches its muscle and expands your excusation, then you know that the member according to this has returned - and at that time adjust the two parts and apply padding and stretch like this so that no part becomes too tight; and keep the thigh rested for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then gently stretch the muscles and apply padding, and compare one muscle against the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And when you see those equalities in your view, then you know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the thigh go smoothly.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that area, extend it according to your first stretching, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then relax that part, and let it walk on any place for a few days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward from its socket, inward towards the center of the body, and to one side away from the back. It is not dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you command the patient to place their elbow on their thigh; then you know that the shoulder has been dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all ways is that you make the patient lie straight, so they can extend their elbow if possible; press your hands to their face and place your foot between their feet; then guide the shoulder towards your palms, holding them firmly with your fingers on the dislocated shoulder as much force as needed; another assistant extends their foot while the shoulder returns to its proper position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery is that their elbow stays attached to the thigh with ease, without strain or difficulty.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster that area and guide the elbow to stick to the thigh, then keep applying this method for one week or two, and then relax that part.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk around for a few days until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of your patient is not possible for you, then apply strong extension to their legs as detailed in the preceding narration on the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle can be occasionally dislocated due to minor injuries, and sometimes it occurs due to overextension or inversion. The dislocation of the ankle can occur either inward or outward from its normal position.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of ankle dislocation is that you notice the ankle swelling proceeding to the part where it has been dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for ankle sprain is minor recovery; it should be extended with ease on the limbs and be evenly applied until it returns to normal.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When treating an ankle that has been dislocated due to inversion, you should make the patient lie straight and have a strong, brave assistant place their hand behind the patient's foot at the middle of their ankle.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you hold your right hand under the top of the patient's foot, and with your left hand behind the lower part of the foot at the ankle area.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and guide it with your left hand in two stages, and extend your left side; and push the patient's feet to the right where their elbow should be.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And perform these two stages as we have discussed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the patient's feet towards their elbow in the third stage, and you are at the ankle region.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two stages following this manner, and if you notice the foot evenly aligned, it's good; otherwise, then on that condition, perform the operation again, which is what returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	So if you are not able to reduce the condition of your patient as we have recommended, then make the assistant lie on their feet on the ground, place a pillow under them in solid earth, and sandwich them between their thighs. You should already wrap the bed around the patient so that they don't slip away.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the attendant should hold his thighs for him, and have another assistant extend their foot against the extension of his leg or under the shoulder if there is something lying on the chest; and guide each person so they are extended against the extension of their partner's limb, and the pillow stays between the attendant's thighs to prevent his body from being pulled towards the outer sides of his extended limbs.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation using his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy thigh on the outer side, where the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you've been informed of the success of the reduction, then stop plastering and stretch that area strongly, and hold the foot against the ankle firmly.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And if you fear or protect from the nerves that are behind on the ankle for which the muscle over it does not become vigorous and injure him strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave that area for two or three days; if the muscle is softened, stretch it again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then relax that part on the third day or fourth; and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	So if it is forced to go before that space, there should be assurance that the dislocation has not dissolved and corrupted over time; otherwise, do not let anything that cannot receive treatment happen.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that there is an abscess in the process, then you should take care to administer according to what we have detailed in our previous account, in another location of healing and treatment, until it has healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocations of the feet' fingers.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Adjust that which is dislocated by a slight extension of several degrees; and that which isn't difficult, before it becomes easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	Maybe if the dislocation is in any heel bones of one's foot, then adjust so that the patient lifts their foot onto a level surface or on a table, and be standing as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then stand on your foot, place your hand on what is under the joints, and apply pressure with your foot with force so that it returns, and you see it already adjusted not appearing in the elevated location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the patient's stomach of their foot on a table that supports all the foot, which has two ends, and apply pressure with firmness for three days; and then release it and let them rest from walking for several days, during which it strengthens and its functionality is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocations that occur in injury or fracture or any other time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those happens, and you engage in the treatment of that and the restoration for them, several deaths result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of that, do not assume control over their treatment, but rather someone who is wise in the art, long practiced, merciful and compassionate, patient, not impulsive or presumptuous; and use only those medicines that induce purges for so long until the body returns to its divine judgment, not to yourself seeking health, but to the alleviation of disease, and in which you have some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then exert to quickly make the reduction while the cause is still present before it turns into a pus-causing cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we want, then administer a regimen that induces pus-causing cautery and treat the injury with what suits your patient from the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation occurs with a fracture and it happens in the separated bones of the foot, then you will straighten them out, and do as we have said about treating simple injuries to what was mentioned earlier regarding those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And according to your skill, avoid what is in the manual of medicine according to which my preaching has preceded you; that is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more health will be seen by your true self as you see those things in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	So conclude the words of Al-Bucasis, perfectly from which God may bless.
Amen.	Amen.
