Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, children, let this book be pleasing to you as it fulfills the science of medicine for your satisfaction, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, in my view, I find that this treatise has been compiled for you. This part is from the operation on myself, which is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation on oneself is confined to our region and in our times entirely private, where its science faces great peril, and its traces have been left behind; it would not be possible without it except for some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which rectify many errors and misconceptions within these confines where interpretations are closed, thus extending the effort and skill required.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is seen by me that this treatise should be revived in the manner of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and to bring forth the forms of the tools like cauteries and other work equipment as part of the explanation, and for their preparation, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for why a good artisan cannot be found to use their own hands in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires expertise before being exercised in the science of anatomy which Gualia knew about the young parts of the members and their shapes, and their connection and separation; one must have knowledge of bones, nerves, and ducts, their number, and their removal; as well as pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations for their exit.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And that is why Hippocrates said about his name is motion, but in the work small, and mostly in the art of hands.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And we have already said about this in the introduction to this book; whoever does not know what we have told you about anatomy will fall into error which can lead to the death of many people, as I have seen too many like them who are formed in this science and then move on to that other field of study.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a physician who was experienced and had performed an abscess operation on the neck of a woman, and he opened several neck arteries so that there would be a great bleeding, resulting in her dying among the many others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who was about to remove a stone from an old man, who had been suffering for his condition, and the stone was large. It successfully removed that stone using a piece of the bladder, resulting in the old man's death on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already attempted to remove it, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and because of the position of the patient beneath him causing obstruction below, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who was paid a fee by a duke from our land for surgery. He operated on a black slave who had suffered a fracture in his thigh; and with his lack of knowledge, he removed the fracture piece onto the wound, using pieces of wood and strong bands around it, not allowing air to enter the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he would let it heal according to his desires, and he would dress the wound, and he would keep it clean for several days and instruct us to remove the stitches; and this is also within when the thigh and the leg abscesses, it will lead to disaster.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I had him call me, and I prepared to remove the stitches, and thus achieved calmness and alleviation of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so I could not stop it, and it continued to spread the corruption within the limb as the patient's condition worsened.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another physician who punctured an abscess and became infected over several days, during which the severity of his illness increased in front of his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is because the young person's body is full of melancholic humors, so it does not spread throughout completely, but rather that one part of their body suffers from being exposed to everything.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on oneself be divided into two desirous aspects: one is in operation towards health associated with it, and another in work where there are major risks.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already established this throughout all parts of this book concerning the operation where errors and fears occur; so it is necessary for you to observe this and guard against that, so as not to confuse others or yourself.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your tools for service and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by God's grace to seek salvation and acceptable succession, and leave your terrible diseases of difficult recovery, and guard against the tools that make you afraid, knowing that more remain for your glory, and further in this world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia had already spoken some wise teachings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Don't treat bad diseases with bad doctors, for it's better not to have a name than to be treated by a bad doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already organized this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and the first part is the first one.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered under 'in the feet', in the forms of tools and the instruments of cauteries, and what is necessary in an operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning drying and piercing, as well as suction cups, plagues, the extraction of arrows, and similarity to those, all organized and detailed regarding the forms of the tools.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and relocation, as well as the treatment of torsion and similarity to those; an organized chapter about injuries within the limbs, and the forms of the tools.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On using fire for cautery, sharp medicine, and recalling the operation procedure.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Here begins the treatise on all free subjects.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Let me tell you about the quality of those affected by this cautery and its consequences, and in which stage it is prohibited to apply cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	So I say that the discussion about the quality of cauterization and its consequences is long-winded and detailed, subtle in science, and hidden in secrecy; many wise men have already spoken extensively on this topic, and they disagree with each other. As for me, it's enough to mention just a small part of their speeches, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus I say that cauterization affects the entire body universally, which is made of matter or two kinds of matter, except for two conditions; these are the conditions of the tailbone.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tailbone and in the dry condition there is only matter; some argue that cauterization should be applied to such conditions, while others argue against it, stating that cauterization is not suitable for maladies of the body which are due to quality and dryness. Since fire has qualities and promotes dryness, applying heat can cause harm by drying out what needs to heal and leaving it dry instead of restoring its health.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And the one who disagrees with you says that in every tail malady which is dry and found in men's bodies, cauterization should be done to promote its healing. When you compare the body of man to the qualities of fire, you find that the body of man is cleansed by heat.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the argument presented there, this experience was something I discovered a few times already.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not for me to delve into matters that have already been discussed in the chapter on cauterization through subsequent exercises, and I am familiar with the diversity of bodily conditions in men and the disposition of their ailments across various body parts, as well as the causes behind them, their accidents, and the timeline associated with these issues.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	For other conditions, you need not fear; especially in wet and humid ailments, all doctors have agreed on these matters, and they are not in disagreement about the use of cauterization in such conditions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its beneficial nature lies in applying cauterizing medicine which burns. For fire is simple; its action reaches only the part being cauterized and does not affect other parts unless there's a small harm involved.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of burning medicine extends to those parts of the body it touches, and strongly promotes making difficult-to-heal injuries easier, as well as speeding up their healing process.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Fire, due to its purity and the excellence of its substance, does nothing else but remove excess. We have come to know this through experiments and from our years of service studying the art, understanding its true causes; hence I apologize for the length of my explanation. But were it not that this knowledge about fire is hidden in my manual and the quality of its operation within the body as well as its expulsion process where you expel diseases, which would be demonstrated philosophically, it would have been enlightening for your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it's best to do cauterization and favor the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, as the harm caused by the incidental accident gets submerged in the healing process of what results from cauterization, especially if it's for pain or necessary pains that are severe and painful ulcers, which do not tolerate delay as feared for those caused by malicious actions, which surpass minor harms occurring due to time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And rest assured in your minds, children, or those who only value the common people and laymen doctors, it's true that not all ailments treated by cauterization are suitable at all times, and they follow this principle.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not just because they are cautious about this, for cauterization is merely a form of medicine that alters body composition and dries out the humidity which causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, excessive cauterizations over medicine due to the value of its effectiveness and the virtue of its operation, as well as the grandeur of its lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It's possible that their ailment could return at some point in time, according to the composition of their body and the location of their illness, as well as its virtue, and what is prepared within their body from the addition of these excesses, as well as what is consumed by them through foods and similar causes; unless the ailment that receives cauterization is a subtle illness involving few excesses and humidity. Just like cauterization for tooth pain and similar cases, it's possible that this particular pain doesn't return within them anymore, but only when dealing with small matters.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	The common language is that a cautery is the last tool of medicine, and this term is formal, not something I understand in it, as they believe it is neither a cure nor a cause related to medicine or any other reason for a cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is opposite to this; I understand that a cautery is the last tool of medicine, not only when administering the methods of treatment in certain illnesses. If those medicines do not work and at the end of the process they apply a cautery and then proceed with it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here are the 16 points that a cautery is the last tool of medicine, not according to my understanding which includes common knowledge and many doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they would say that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they didn't say this simply because of the equality of gold and its inferiority to the substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they would say that the place for cautery does not smell bad, as this is not absolutely true; I have already done this and found out that it doesn't do this in certain types of bodies, and a cautery made with gold is good and better than iron too, as they said. But otherwise, when you make a cautery over fire using gold, it's not like you're declaring its use, because the heat depends on the quantity you want for the strength of the gold, and what needs to be received during combustion; and if you adjust over this flame, the gold is melted by the fire, and in some cases, layers are produced so that the artisan can work with it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, when making a cautery out of iron, you should do so more lightly and more precisely in the direction of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have organized those of the head in the feet, because I am asking for what you want from them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding cautery for headache due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery treatment is attributed to humidity and coldness causing the unfortunate event of which there are two causes, they are due to excess of water and trauma from fluid movement, called gushes, from the head to the parts of the ears and the ear canals, and from sleeping, and toothache and tonsillitis, and universally for any illness that comes from coldness, such as paralytic illnesses, edema and apoplexy, and resembling those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery treatment is as follows, which we initially command the patient to be under the application of a diuretic medicine on their head for three or four nights, according to what you require and the patient's age and their usual habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and make that servant stand between your servants on a lowered bench, and place his servants on his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the tip of your palm near the nose between his ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when your indicated middle location has been reached, mark that place with desire, and then ignite the olive cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the marked desired location, in such a way that it descends, with your hand being gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see any part of the brain being exposed to some extent, like the quantity of oil, then raise your hand. If it doesn't show anything, turn your hand towards that iron, or another one, if it's cold, in which I've told you to look for what I said.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve that over the spot, and let it sit for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place on his burnt cheek in bandages, and let it sit until the skin of the heat has been destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with turpentine tetrabromide until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they used to say that when the wound in Roman times was opened, it smelled much better because it is better and more rejuvenating.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they would say some of them that the canal is cauteryed in the skull, and that you should keep the cautery until a part of the specificity of the skull becomes hard.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then make this mark which sticks to the skull, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they would say others that when the cautery reaches the end, it begins to strengthen in the skull until the skull breaks away, and this is the form of small cautery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And from that place, they estimate the escape of the steam from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be open for a long time, and then let it heal until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May I not see these two types of cautery throughout, but in some people according to fear; and let this be, I beg you, better with health when it happens; because the head is released by the solution of continuity of him thus as we have testified in other limbs, especially when the head of the patient is of fluid nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the type of cautery first is more beneficial and better you should use it; from that one use that action for your health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the head's cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged head pain occurs in the patient's body, and if it uses weapons, armor, pillows, plasterings, gloves, coats, and cloths, especially if a cautery has already been used with a single cautery that doesn't intensify its weakness from those causes; then consider whether the patient's body is of strong constitution by nature; and not being overly exhausted by effort or work, in which case the head is cauterized using another type of cautery; he leaves the first one alone for a little while.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the crown of his head with an internal cautery where the disease is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the disease and expose the amount of which we have recounted; then cauterize that with a cautery in the rear part behind the head at the place which is called artery - and it is that place where suction is performed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And hold your hand in ash, and do not expose the bone, for the patient experiences intense pain of a different kind due to this method compared to all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I prescribe this cautery in its place, for it is that cautery with which you cauterize the crowns of the head and the occiput is more delicate than that one with which you cauterize the middle area of the head; and this is how he does it.
Capitol ters.	Final chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the removal of old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain is localized in the head region or persists within the skull, it should be relieved with medicinal treatments that alleviate symptoms, and then other therapies are administered; those are described elsewhere in my treatments for illnesses. If these do not relieve the pain adequately, then the treatment involves two methods: one with a sudden burning medicament, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The type of cautery with a burning medicine involves taking half an apple, and piercing it, then cutting off the ends from both the halves.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then pierce the pain area on the temples with a thin needle where you make the wound, and then let the disease remain hidden inside.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply strength over it stopped by descent constriction, and allow that to be free through the spaces of three hours; and wash the apple and let the wound remain for two or three days, and rest on your back submerged in water where the area feels warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you observe this, do so with some burning medicines which I have written about in my detailed treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cautery with iron follows this method: heat it until it reaches the form of fire:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called the lock pick, because it forms like a thorn in which there is some curvature; in its middle part of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the painful area; restrain your hand - so as not to heat the metal which is left, - and rotate the small iron piece gradually at speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that gets heated due to the intensity of the disease is almost all of it, raise your hand so that the artery which is left isn't heated, so as not to cause bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak your hand in salt water and place it over the area, and let that rest for three days; and then soak the hand in hot water, and treat with ointment until healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see fit, perform the cautery at the end of the thorn instrument as per the method, and beware of causing an artery incision in this old migraine.
Capitol quart.	Final chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the treatment for old migraines through cautery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines as we've described with previous cures and the divisions of illnesses, if those treatments are not enough due to the nature of the illness, then consider igniting the thorn-shaped cautery until it becomes white-hot. Then place your hand over the painful area along a long line which represents most of what was said about the first cautery with medicine or the fire-cautery; pause for a moment and apply strength under this while piercing the artery and going into the skull.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must take care not to damage the jawbone, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the tongue isn't heated and the nerves associated with it aren't injured, and prevent any spasms from occurring.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it's concerning the fear of bleeding from the artery which is cut, there should be a certain caution and more so for those who don't know what they're doing and aren't experienced; leave the operation as planned.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will recall the regulation of bleeding in the event of an artery injury according to your method, at this place in the manual.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you observe this illness that isn't treated with this cautery and finds the body of the illness tolerable, perform the cautery in the middle part of the head as we recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery we have mentioned for the tip of the artery where the cautery has two blades, and this is a better cautering and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Head./
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Regarding the treatment of earache injuries.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to friction and it is treated by lack-causing factors and another treatment which I mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not subside, then apply fire cautery, this is the one known as point, of which this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place the point close to the fire, and let it touch around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in any circuit if the pain is in any part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue with the ear cautery little by little, until you have found the spot and tried it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points throughout the ear, and remains there, then treat the areas within that are to be healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI./
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Regarding the treatment of tortures.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The torture that is cured and treated with cautery is simply of the species that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the species that arise from drying out or muscle spasms of nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of torture with stones, urine, and purgatives, and if your treatment doesn't work, then follow this for the part of the body where you apply cautery: first, treat the tip of the ear, secondly a little less than half its width, and thirdly, treat the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery opposite the diseased part, where only a healing is sought in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to apply it on the right side of the end of the ear a bit higher than the edge of the head, and in the temple area another, whose length should be according to the length of that part, then pause your hand with cautery until that quantity of the essence of the cord is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the method for cautery, it's the specialty of surgeons, its form being in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it's somewhat subtle that you should do this only a little bit; and observe when the blade is in place of excessive roughness, just a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area where it's being processed until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII./
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Regarding the treatment of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and treated with what we've said, but if your medicine doesn't work and the body has no fever, then apply cautery in four stages: over all parts of their head; on top of this, at the middle of their forehead, as we have said; and apply cautery to their chest.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method for applying cautery is done according to what was previously described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And once it's been applied over the mouth of the stomach; and more at the rear end; then treat with what you're using to proceed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII./
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Regarding the treatment of forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Make sure you give the body large stones and pills for digestion at mealtime.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then rub the entire head of the body and pause on their chest covered with the center as described in the plaster treatment manual.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that for a few times, which is the method of applying cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to that order of methods I've already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if that brings good health; otherwise, then apply three cauterizations to the very back part of their head, which should be descending from the more elevated part of the head towards the more lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery for as long as that time, and then treat the area where it's being processed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if your tolerance increases and the body can bear it, then apply cautery in the middle area; and if you have more tolerance, then apply cautery over both parts.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And treat that until it heals; and let the olive oil be applied according to the method described previously.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX./
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Regarding the treatment of paralysis and soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Make sure you proceed with digestion of the head with stones and as we have said; then rub the head of the body, and apply cautery in the middle of the head, and apply cautery over all parts of their head, and apply cautery on the very back end of them, and apply three cauterizations to the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it's necessary in the disease of soothing the body for many and if the body can tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then apply cautery over four cauterizations on both spines, and afterwards apply cautery until that part of their body burns completely, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And treat that until it heals; this is olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X./
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the treatment of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The treatment is not a cautery for the epileptic, but rather that type of epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, modify the patient's diet at the beginning of their thirties and in another treatment which we have described in the division when the illness is large and can withstand the side effects of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it's a child who doesn't tolerate the medicines, then administer mild remedies and chewers that modify the intestinal activity, for several days before, with the improvement of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery at its middle on the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery at the back of their head, and over each corner of their head she applies a cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the illness is strong and can withstand it, then apply those cauteries I mentioned, with a paralysis-like effect and body softening on the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive oil-based cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the illness is for a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter十一.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the treatment of melancholy with cauteries.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are wet humors and sluggish phlegm, then apply those cauteries we have mentioned in having a paralysis-like effect.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then give them to drink what modifies the head as we have described in the previous section for modifying the head.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient's head, and then make a moderate tortoise shell on it over the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And when the patient is sixty years old, they should be treated with every part of this treatment.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply lotion; it's worthy to use an old sheepskin dressing.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for a well-prepared warmth, which the patient feels increases with time.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And apply that in the middle of the head on the circle, let the patient stay inside until it cools down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient for one week in total, with the rest of their diet until they are healed; or if you want to, apply this makes small points according to his preference, rather than leaving your hand on a cautery like this: this is a type of cautery that moistens the head equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And apply that cooked pate in grease or in wool rags.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the treatment of descending water with cauteries.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have been told the beginning of water in the womb through the signs that I mentioned in the division, then start and give the patient to drink what modifies their head, and protect it from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make them dissolve sugar in hot water for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command them to shave their head, and apply a cautery on the middle of the head; and then apply two cauteries over two temples if it's the beginning of descent of water in two wombs, or on one side if it's the beginning of water in one womb.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Let the cauteries affect all veins and arteries which are left from the chain; and let the cauteries be in that length across the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And watch out for blood flows when they are being treated with cauteries; and if you notice the patient's blood flow, give them some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with knowledge about what's in the extraction of arteries and about removing those, as well as caution against blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is treated by applying a few cauteries in the neck between two bones with two applied cauteries sequentially.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the wombs are old and seem to be due to humors present outside of the head region and it has been confirmed that this is an excess of phlegm causing the tears, then apply a cautery with the type of cautery we have described in the chapter on beginning water in the wombs, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on either side of the temples, and apply two cauteries on each side of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you experience excessiveness, then apply a cautery on the whole back of the womb over the tip of the eyebrow with small cauteries.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the treatment of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with what we've said in the division and doesn't improve your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient garlic for three nights; and then shave the head of the patient, and apply a mid-size olive oil-based cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply that with a thorn's oil-based cautery and two small cauterizations over the two eyebrows leaving some hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And watch out not to ignite that artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of applying that thorn oil-based cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Cautery for the softening of eyelid swellings in patients.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the patient is swollen due to illness or moisture, then that eyelid is cauterized with a cautery; and this is how it is done:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do the cauterization above both eyebrows with a small to two cauteries across entirely, and make them long on the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery correspond to the amount of eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to how much of the eyelid is heated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Cautery of the eyelid in patients when the skin turns into divisions inside and on the hand of the patient.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the patient turns into divisions inside such that I touch the skin, two methods are used for the cautery: either as a physical cautery or with a medicinal burning agent.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If it is a physical cautery with fire, instruct the patient facing this so that they feel their skin as if those who cleanse them, until they are extended and equalized; and if you touch it, then when you place your hand on their birthplace, then you strengthen the skin of the patient with a bandage to prevent burning until the hair is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Once they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient on your own side, and press about the eyelid of the patients with your hand, marking it in a symbol as if it were a holly leaf shape, and make the mark near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place butterfat or pus from hog or from pustule on the skin.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply the heat of the cautery, such is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then gradually cauterize over the figure that was marked, little by little, in spots burned out, while burning the surface of the skin which is like a holly leaf, altogether visibly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of health in the treatment is that you see the eyelid of the patient already contracted and the skin of it being raised above the point on the skin.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and press it gently with the palm while the scab is being formed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if any cause returns through the skin near its birthplace and the eyelid becomes swollen, then do another treatment of cautery over that entire area as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is left on the eyelid, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and becomes equal, so that the skin does not hurt the face.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cauterization with a burning medicine is that you command the patient to feel their skin until it is extended and equalized, then have a piece of cloth made in the shape of a holly leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some familiar soap and a live onion. .1., Take this preparation and mix those ingredients well, do so quickly to prevent cooling down; then spread it on the cloth made in such a way as if it were a holly leaf shape, place that over one or both of the eyelids; press with butterfat from hog or in its place, and keep the head of the patient facing your side.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place that with the medicine on it and press slightly on it but do not burn the patient when they feel the pain of the medicine, which is like being burned for them.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when they continue to feel this pain, then remove the medicine and take it off your designated spot; once the pain stops, then reapply the medicine with water on the eyelid; and then consider if the eyelid has already lifted as if it was cleaned by fire or incision, which is when you do that here; and if it does not return to that place under the medicine on the location where they did not apply the medicine and does not worsen until your operation is equalized and the eyelid is contracted again.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then press it gently with the palm while waiting for the scab from adjustment to be eradicated, and cure that with definitive ointment or otherwise until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to maintain vigilance in your operation that the medicine does not spill over on the skin of the patient, and if the eyelid is somewhat days swollen and some cause from the hair touches the eyelid, then apply your medicine to that place which is swelled by the eyelid, and do so properly as initially instructed, and press gently around it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a holly leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that men's eyelids are differentiated according to size and thinness, therefore according to this you do your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let there be no concealment of the path of justice towards that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Regarding cautery treatment for a fistula that occurs in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat the fistula as we have discussed in the divisions of illness and do not provide your cure, then instruct that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head facing your side, and have someone attendant's head between yours so they are neither burnt nor agitated by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place a point on fat in butter or in flour on the skin of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is how the shape of this type of cautery should be made:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be cylindrical, as the shape of a cane or a goose quill is, with one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see that it penetrates into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be out like a thread.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, for the purpose of work, that which is cylindrical is better in Gaul.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if there is an opening, press it to allow the healing and dry out that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it's not open, then make an incision there and remove the pus from him.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place on him the hot cautery, have your hand in Gaul but a little of the cautery at the nostril opening, so that your hand doesn't move or disturb the patient, then pause the cautery in the gray area and destroy it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And indeed, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the mouth, it's good; and otherwise, then reapply the cautery once or twice if necessary; and let that be for three days, then place a point on that area with oil around it so that dried ointment is between where it is to heal.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been more than ten days and is not healed, then apply the sharp corrosive medicine inside where the bone is revealed and scrape according to what suits in its skull.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way to apply a cautery to a fistula which some initially described: locate the place of the fistula and make an incision there and press that point with a thin material in the form of it; put one unit of melted lead in that area; hold your hand firmly without causing pain to the patient so that the melted lead does not enter his nose; and when you apply it over the nasal passage, like a point on fat or water, when the lead covers the site of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have described with this about cautery and healing, it's good; and otherwise, then it's necessary to administer a nostril scrape and reduce the fistula to the chest of the nose according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Capítulo XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Regarding the cautery for a cut on the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Red spots may occur in cuts, especially on children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat those cuts as we have told you in the sections and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form that we described:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its depth be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then pause that initial incision in those cuts where the cautery reaches to the base of the cuts.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And after that, heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Capítulo XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Regarding the cautery for a sinus in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is pus in the uvula or on the palate or in the root of the teeth, causing swelling, when it breaks open and heals over time, forming a sinus, and if you treat that without going too deep into healing, then determine the amount of heat required for the cautery based on what is inside the sinus, place the heated tool at the opening of the sinus, have your hand so that the heated tip reaches to the base of it, and do this once or twice; then treat it as we have described with healing treatments until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing has been removed and it has healed, it's good; and otherwise, then it is necessary to discover the location and remove the diseased bone according to what suits in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Capítulo XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Regarding the application of cautery to teeth and soothing of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are painful, treat those with medicines but do not apply them directly. Then hold the head of the patient in their usual position and place the heated cautery tool accordingly nearby. You should pause when you press against a tooth and immediately introduce the hot cautery tool into that area to prevent the heat from reaching the tooth's root.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery for several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then have the patient drink water from a salt bowl and keep that there for an hour, and afterwards let it out. This way, hardened teeth are softened, inflamed gums are made less inflamed, and excessive moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	About the application of a cautery to toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness or worms within, or if you don't find medication effective, then apply a cautery to it in two ways: either by applying a cattle's border (or possibly meaning the surface), or by directly placing the flame.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Applying the cautery to the surface means you take cow's tallow and heat it in a pot. Then prepare some wick and cover its end with this substance, dip that covered end into the heated tallow, and then hold that over the painful tooth as quickly as possible until it gets cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then apply this process several times so that the heat of the flame reaches to the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see fit, immerse wool or cloth in the tallow above mentioned and place this over the painful tooth, holding it against a burning iron until the heat of the iron reaches to the tip of the tooth cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when using a flame for cautery, you should wait until there's a small ember or at the heart of the iron, and make sure that the heat of the flame does not reach into the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then light the cautery in such a way that its heat will come to resemble what you want, hold it over the tooth while keeping your hand there until the heat of the cautery cools down; and do this several times so that the pain is somewhat relieved either on the same day or the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And as for the application of that cautery which fills the patient's mouth with good tallow and keeps it there for an hour, then swallow that; this is how to apply the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery to whatever end you see fit according to what's feasible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is how it should be done with the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	About the application of a cautery to hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are due to phlegm and cold fluids that don't respond to medicine, yet digestion is somewhat improved after this process, follow this method for applying the cautery: have it in two blunt ends so you can blow out the smoke from one end while holding the flame at the other. Hold the lit end over the hernia pocket once, or do it again if necessary until heat reaches to its tip.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the hernia pocket is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the pocket. Then rest it for three days and cover it with a cloth immersed in tallow while letting what burned by the flame be relieved.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the catheter or the method for applying the cautery to it should be done as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	About the application of a cautery to respiratory obstruction and tightness in the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture invades the channel of the lung, especially when this is due to body coldness, then ensure that the patient has an evacuation at meals with laxative medicines, and apply cautery by heating up the area behind the throat where it is compressed.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not apply the cautery to the throat or burn from the patient's neck, just a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply the cautery at another point by heating up the junction of the neck with the lower part of the spine on the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The application of the cautery to his collar bone should be done in a similar manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with what was described beforehand until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	About the application of a cautery to lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to moisture that does not cause fever or dyspnea, they are old, then apply the cautery in two places on the sternum where it is compressed by the neck and underarms; and at another place in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and when applying the collarbone cautery do so as described previously.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make your application of the puncture to the cautery which is called punctation, as described in the section on puncturing ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points within the grooves at those places; and then treat that with whatever application was described beforehand until it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And already make three points for that cautery; and when you do the application of the cautery, you can perform three cauterizations according to this manner:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	About the application of a cautery to the tip, which is the head of the penis.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the penis is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and is not returning in its usual time, you should reduce the dislocation before it returns back to its normal place, as what we've witnessed. Then have the patient lie on his side or on his stomach; lift the neck which is at the opening inside the tip from your left hand's fingers when the connection is dislocated internally.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is necessary to have two heads for the cautery; this is how it works:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And it should be heated inside the channel so that it goes into the other side; and here comes the image of the cautery treatment, using two heated points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and those subtle ones according to the amount of the ailment; this is how it works:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some treatments are adjusted according to this count and for what purposes are the cauteries .VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And it is necessary to place on the cautery with salt pans, and it should be made for the patient to lie in repose, and the body should not get worse until it is relieved of discomfort.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and in the thigh, it should be treated this way: apply a cautery over the muscle with a rod or needle cauteries points, where the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced, thus healing the patient.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the treatment of the stomach with a cautery.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and moisture are inside the stomach that comes from his body and multiplies within him, if you continue with the methods of treatment without curing it, then it seems that the patient is under the impression of regaining his strength, extending his limbs and his things, and applying a cautery to this in three applications: an one point for the quantity equal to an application's worth of a needle cautery on his foot, and with two points from both sides of the cautery, until you get the figure of a triangular cautery; and extend among those that are not adjusted they will do reduction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the two-thirds of the thickness of the canal's wall.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And make the shape of the cautery according to this form as an addition. If you wish, apply a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery according to the circular shape according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And treat the stomach with points to which that is scared by this cautery: and you should apply points on the stomach according to the quantity that you desire for the ailment, and then apply this method of treatment using a cautery at these points; and take care of this with the treatment leading to healing.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On treating the kidney stones with a cautery.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the kidney due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind that gets from his normal body due to unnecessary discharge, if the patient heals as we have said and does not recover, then it seems that the patient regains strength on their back, and you apply three cauterizations according to this form at this quantity over the kidney under the hips, while lying in the position of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery according to the thickness of the digit, and make the cauterizations according to the length of the human body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And don't hesitate about yourself when it comes to applying the cauterization heat.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that has been applied is equal to the height of the thickness of the canal's wall; and do not make it too tight; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then they should lie down, which already extends their limbs, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it's possible for you to apply these cauterizations with an incision cautery when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And make sure you don't overdo the cauterization process, and ensure that the thickness of the entire canal is heated so that it can reach throughout the body, as this canal here is delicate; be aware of this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On piercing kidney abscess with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or abscess in the kidney and you want to know if that abscess is within the kidney tissue or on its covering, then if it's within the kidney tissue, the patient experiences increased gravity and pain intensification.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it's on the kidney covering, the pain is intense and often times the doctors have tired of treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	And it seems that the patient should lie on their back; and then indicate the location of the abscess with points; and then heat the cautery which resembles a rag, as its shape was explained in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply this and that cautery until all the canal is heated, until it reaches the stomach, until you achieve health.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with treatment for other abscesses until he heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And don't use this form of cautery treatment other than the one that the study in the art of medicine extends, and about which many maladies are known; however, some treatments have been tried on this operation, but still follow this method, it's better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On treating lumps with a cautery.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient methods of applying cauteries to lumps were done according to this manner, and here's what you should use from the parts of aristocracy; take a long, dried part of aristocracy that is found, which has the thickness of a digit.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and place the fire on it, and apply a cautery at that location which is between the continuation of the scapula and the neck; and with two cauteries, leave them burning where they are behind the neck. And make another application at the point that declines between the fifth rib and the spine, declining one toward the area behind; and make another application at the site that declines between the second and third ribs, declining one further towards the back; and make another application in the middle of the chest; and also on the stomach, and make three applications at those points behind; and make another application where is located that point which is between the two shoulders, and make two applications on each side of the back.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And don't withdraw your hand from the application of the cautery, rather let it be in the operation's progress as seen by the patient.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And it is said by some ancient ones that such men who use a kind of iron cautery resembling a ray and fire, place that in the location which is between the ribs, where we reach into that from this to that blister, healing it healthily as we have mentioned about the blister of scabies.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Fear not for this puncture with the cautery, rather what often happens when you burn it in the location of the fistula where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	End of chapter xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery treatment for boils.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of boils as we have instructed for treatment in section and do not apply your own remedy, then when applying cautery to it, there are three methods, all of which are according to custom. Among these, one is to make three or four lines with the cauterization in a row along the length of the boil, as shown by the figures of scabies' cauterizations, which I have already described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between every cautery, there should be about the thickness of a finger or perhaps less, and the method of applying the cautery is in the same way as we have described for the cautery of scabies.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not remove your hand from the application of the cautery; and let the patient lie on their back with their hands above them.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of applying cautery, in that you ignite the cautery with two streams, which we have described in the chapter on dislocation of muscles, and raise the body where it is perpendicular to the boil, so that when the patient lies down on their left side, they do not feel any discomfort.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that when you raise the body according to the length of the torso, so that cautery is done according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both streams inside, ignite the fire in that place where the body of the other side penetrates.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and therefore it is done with four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see fit, apply cautery using three streams.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery if it has let blood for too many days, as better is to consider these other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	End of chapter xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery treatment for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be done on the entire body but only in a specific place.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy as we have described in the section and do not apply your own treatment, then immerse that you cautery it with four applications around the navel area and one application on the stomach, another on the scabies, another on the boil, two around the two sides, and one application to the right side of the back, and another application on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be roughly proportional to the thickness of the body.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the application of the cautery spread freely, so that blood flows for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery as it might cause two misunderstandings and needs assistance for recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery where it is applied to the belly should be curved as per the shape of that which was previously used, and that for which it is applied to the back is similar to an olive according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	End of chapter xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery treatment for the legs and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the legs are swollen with water and filled with salty fluid, you should apply cautery to the back of the legs up to the point between the auricle and annular bones. Raise your hand over the application without twisting it; then raise your hand further, do not remove it entirely as the salty water will dissipate.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The application of cautery is as follows: Then apply two applications on each thigh, and for every part, make the cut near the tip of the cutting tool's application.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the applications of the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: hold one at the bottom and the other in the middle of each thigh; and on each thigh, two applications.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the open wound receive long treatment for as much time as some water may remain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat those causes that we have described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of chapter xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery treatment for abdominal areas.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is due to friction and by humidity inside which distends the organs, it is the digestive and retaining functions, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, that cause this. It is treated with various curative methods without surgery, and sometimes the patient experiences a demonstration of the function's extraction, then apply a large cauterization on their stomach according to what preceded in the stomach's cauterization, applying the cauterization to the circle and four cauterizations around the subtle umbilical circuit, performing a subtle clavilh cauterization; and apply a cauterization over the anus for a long time or perform two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you encounter excessively wet conditions and the patient can tolerate it, then apply a cauterization on the navel and to the intestines, and reinforce by adjusting two cauterizations on the stomach and close to the groin areas. This is a complete cure for young ailments of which you would not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is of a nature to cause old hemorrhoids or one with large humors or corrupt moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division without undergoing your treatment method, then apply three cauterizations on the pus left behind by the two small and small triangular spots. Then perform a cauterization over the navel depression for two times.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach of your patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face is swollen, then apply a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has preceded; and perform one cauterization on the back, and another on the chest with a cauterization for the navel. Leave the cauterizations open for some time until the opening is healed, and treat your patient until they are cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of the artery near the surgical incision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the artery, then you ignite the cauterizing tool that is assembled like a probe.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Insert that ignition into the cut artery, and finish your hand's movement so that the cauterization reaches to the opening of the vein from which the flow comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if there are too many, then cauterize each according to what we have recounted, and treat those with the ointment you give them until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you apply a large cauterization to any part, it will heal more efficiently in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in parts of a person's body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	If nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in its place and the patient is frightened by this, then they should be treated with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when some has a fistula in nature that occurs naturally, and it is old, sick with sputum and corrupted moisture, then what deserves to be removed from this should be cut open with a subtle tool. And you should know the depth of this area according to the previously mentioned tool.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And ignite the cauterizing instrument that resembles a probe.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that ignited cauterizing tool into this fistula, and according to the depth in which it enters the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply this cauterization over that until those diseased bodies are burned out, once or twice, three times, depending on the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn nerves or veins; if the fistula goes towards the bladder or towards the intestinal cavity, then you must avoid all those areas. And do this only when the fistula is in a meaty area and you consider that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And treat that area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and all substances have been removed from it, but it still remains long, then you should know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the substances are not from your body, then you should know that it is penetrating or within a part of your body's corruption, or comes from those causes which will bring memory in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in ulcers there is pain due to friction or by a large amount of air, and the patient's buttocks have become hardened, then it should be cut open and you should cauterize each ulcer with a cauterization over each ulcer and apply subtle cauterizations for recalling that memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And reinforce each cauterization with a small amount of the substance left behind, so that three linear cauterizations come about, and thus they will heal more efficiently in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes distended and loses its elasticity due to friction and moisture such that the patient does not retain urine, then apply a cauterization at the place where there is pus left behind on the bladder, which is similar to the skin of the navel, and cauterize with one cauterization on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cauterization be according to the amount of pus; and apply a cauterization on the lowest part of both sides, or two cauterizations if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And when a knifewound needs a searing as it proceeds.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the searing of the scrotum.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is blood and moisture in the scrotum, and because of this, intercourse is prohibited, and his menstrual cycles become corrupted, and their triggering is delayed, and pain occurs during urination, then you should apply three searings around the area of the navel, as we have said about searing the bladder; and also make a searing on that spot at least two inches above or below from his penis, or make two searings, and do not forget to use knife incisions.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter xli.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the searing of the dislocation of the anus.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture causes them to infiltrate the part of the anus, and they produce disturbances in his body's condition, a sign is that his thigh gets extended over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation occurs in the patient's buttocks.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should sear the patient's buttocks over the exit part of his anus with searing like a circle, and when you have made a cut around that area as it has been described, and for him to lie on his side so that the exit part falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And make the searings similar to what was described for the stomach's searing process.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this searing is not before you, then make three searings on it with large olive wood searings.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the searing according to the amount of hardness throughout the entire chain; and treat that area until it heals.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xlii.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the searing of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs at the exit part of urine, and it's caused by his friction and moisture, the buttocks are cured with what we have said earlier without mixing, and after that, you should loosen the buttocks from large fluids using blistered pills or artificial pills or something similar; then proceed to sear that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of searing in that place is according to two methods: or sear with burning medicines, or sear with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two known methods, of which one is to sear that area on the width of the buttock with three triangular searings according to this form; and make those searings good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And between each searing, the size of the hardness as described should be there; and use the olive or large searings.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Make some wounds on the middle area over the end of the anus, for there should be four searings.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, sear with the circle described in the searing of the dislocation of the anus, that which contains and burns the hardness throughout the entire chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of searing in case of pain that is attached to urine and does not extend within the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it does extend within the thigh, then sear that area with two searings over the thigh on the location where you will find the buttocks which is the pain; and make one searing in a square of four dits toward slightly towards the inner side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it's with a surgical knife, then the depth of the searing should be according to the hardness of the entire chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the buttocks encircles where the pain is extended within the thigh area, then sear that place here, wherever you encircle, with a searing through three points or four or more if it's necessary for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the buttocks encircles such pain being below the knee joint, then sear that area here with a surgical knife searing.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in all searing procedures, make sure not to end the searing until you burn nerves or large artery, and because of this, you should be careful not to improperly heal or constrict the buttocks.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen several of those who sear on the hollow space and complete in the searing process, and the fire-filled bed under which the tumor has achieved the foot, and the fire-pierced and corrupted whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And it often causes strong stomach fluid, and through this, death occurs.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, sear each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And some wise ones say about searing of urine, this is the method: make it resemble a circular iron with its circuit being half a palm; and according to its aperture as wide as one finger or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle place another tool; and make the space between them as long as one finger; and those circles should be opened on two parts; and let the length of those cuts be one finger or two fingers, and make those marks properly on the circles; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And it should be ignited in the fire until it heats up and produces sparks, and then place it on the exit part of urine, with the buttocks pressed against the side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And sear that area with three round-shaped searings in one occasion.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And for three days, gently lay the affected area; and cover it with plaster and allow the opened wound to heal for many days; and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis: oh child, for this type of cautery we have used it in regard to the treatment of these conditions, and for this reason we found those that watch over them.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	The reasons behind the use of cautery on the sick who suffer from it, and finds that place on him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	The principle of cautery in medical practice is that you make two concentric circles with an incision hole in which the key of the lock is placed; its length should be as long as two walnuts or chestnuts along the circumference when applied to a human body.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each is of the quantity of the thickness of the mentioned thing; open these on either side and above them, so that they contain themselves among each according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And if you place your hand on the water part of the patient lying above it, and press your hand on the water part; then take some boiled water and put it between the two circles, so that its quality is with a small fire, and keep that for an hour, - let the sick person chew and adjust themselves - until the chewing starts like from fire - when the chewing stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand to the tool and remove all the boiled water from the water area.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And gently lay the affected area for three days and place it over the plaster where the color of adjustment is intensified, and continue this treatment for several days, let the wound drain; this lasts until old age.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And once healed, treat it with ointment.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended inside the thigh or leg, place him in a position where he contains water as it is done with water equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of boiled water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of the ashes not extinguished from both parts one, thrice use them in a new wave where the part on the left is pierced by a small tool, according to the amount that fits into your hand.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And on the bottom of the wave place another wave in the opposite direction, and pour over that alkali and live ashes with a thin layer of boiling water which fits into your hand, and once you have grasped those under your hand for good compression, let the hot steam from that sharp water reach the part left on the opposite wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, pour it over another live ash and another new alkali, when those will then have a strong heat effect, which is administered in various medical operations and in the cautery of other members, this operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And there are some medicines among which the area is treated by cautery, such as bleeding and melting with fat in a pan that should be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia describes the operation and treatment of an ancient method used to treat water pain and sciatic vein pain, praising its effectiveness, stating that it doesn't require any other treatment, and that it heals in one go as instructed, allowing him to bathe and be comfortable with that knowledge.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is near to a vertebra in the spine, and if no vertebra is found, take a recent fig; then carefully mix it with a little ash and place it on the water where there is pain or in the thigh, or leg, and bind it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for a duration of three hours or until the patient feels relief from discomfort.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And after that bathe him in water, and when his body turns red, immerse him in the sun, until the pain subsides and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that only one should use cautery with these medicines instead, it's about the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And Escorides already said that when there is an injury to the vein, it's cauterized; and you should proceed with the person gently. And this is how you do the cautery: take wool and heat it in old oil, then place it between his feet and between his knees.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And after taking a dry goat's wound, place it in the fire until charcoal is formed; and then place him on top of wool until he feels stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, and don't stop doing this until the sensation of chewing reaches the water and rests the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the subject of treatment by cautery for a second degree burn.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some burns cause pain in the second degree due to various causes, such as impact or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through infusion of damp material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And apply cautery only in this single type which is made through the effusion of damp material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So, proceed with the evacuation of the patient using fitted pills and resembling them, which are made on top of the second degree burn up to three lines according to the width of it, because try out in each line one or more cauteries depending on how well-tolerated by the patient and the virtue of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And a point cautery treatment is done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do a three-point or four-point cautery on the medial tibial spine following this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From cautery to the beginning of lithiasis treatment.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Causes of this disease in young children; and the signs indicating its beginning in them are that it affects their bones, causing deformity and increasing height and mobility.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And there are abnormalities in the lower vertebral column of the back and on their shoulders that begin to rise above other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you do this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that with a point according to this manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	let the cautery touch all parts of the vertebral column equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize on the vertebral circuit with a point cautery two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the area where it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May ensure that cautery is not administered in lithiasis caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Regarding the treatment of gout and joint pain through cautery.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that infiltrate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it's customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And how is gout caused by friction treated with the method of cure and without leaving behind any pains, it then uses cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize there near the evacuation in the joint's circuit on the foot with multiple points of cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And an olive-shaped cautery, such as this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it's necessary to make points on the foot's surface, then you do a point cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains ascend within the knees or to other joints, and this is what doctors observe, then you should cauterize that over each knee with three or four points in total around this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if the cauterys you apply are necessary for your needs, then you should cauterize that and not press too hard with your hand before, only around the size of the vein.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains go into both knees, then administer the cautery which we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in one, it is called gout, then puncture along the circuits of the veins as they flow, puncture on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the circuits of the veins on every bone and over the knuckle of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains remain for days near the ribs or in the muscles, then cauterize all parts of the aids.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not let the patient's health and medicine intake go wrong, for if good treatment is given and fever is relieved by this cautery, it will lead to healing, may God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Regarding the treatment of wounds with cautery.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the lungs and discussing hernias before the surgeon, and this is how they begin from here, then advise that the patient leave his food for the day and use gentle means so that the opening of his abdomen would decrease.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And have the patient follow between your hands on his back, and command that he holds his chest where there should be a hole or the hernia appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to your fingers and feel the rupture on the bones of the elbow with the sign being similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat up the cautery like this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Let it be moist and emit sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the hernia or the bulge to its original size, and place your hand over the area to prevent the hernia from protruding.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, one for their legs, another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand over the point of cautery, and feel inside where you can touch the bones of the elbow in the middle of the body; repeat this process on another area if you have not succeeded in the first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your cautery procedure, ensuring that you do not remove the hernia from the patient such that death or other serious harm befalls the person.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery but do not touch the bones, your operation does not come to fruition.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be aware that for children, the cautery should be fine according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the affected area with balm for three days until the scab of the wound falls off.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the wound is sealed and the injury healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And make sure to adjust the nourishment for the patient according to the duration of their healing process, which stretches out over the belly, and ensure that the intestine does not protrude from the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is almost time to remove it after about ten days, properly apply balm, and keep that area for another ten days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And if it is reduced by work and food intake, as well as drinking and the use of strong drinks, so that when using this complete regimen for healing, it will be healed entirely.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will explain the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, at meals, and you must not let it heal on its own. Instead, cauterize that rupture with a pointed cautery according to the patient's quantity, so that as much as is expelled from the body should be treated like another part of it; and treat that which we have discussed accordingly, do not adjust it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already say some first that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is done with effort:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a line is made across the width at more than half of the rupture, and another line above it; and place your hand on a triangular cautery, where the first cautery is softer and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When persistent pain occurs in certain limbs due to impact or percussion and the pain persists for a long time without responding to medicines, then make sure to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And adjust the cauterization for each member according to its size and thickness, its effectiveness and development, as well as the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; and otherwise, then iterate on this member with cauterization; for usually when such pains occur, they puncture parts of the body corresponding to that part closest to the patient, so make sure to use these types of cauterization until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter LVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some ulcers on the skin are treated with cauterization due to strong youth, and more so if it is a type of leprosy caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize that, consider whether the leprosy is spreading and if it has healed according to what we said in the division of treatment and did not worsen or remain unchanged. If you are worried about the corruption spreading throughout the patient's body and his entire appearance, then cauterize that on top of the head using this method: one near the center of the head, and the second a little further down from there, place the forehead at the end of the hairline; and both over two horns; and one behind, on the back or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And with your hand using this cautery for a little while, let her begin to make an impression in the mouth, and if she has been shifted, so that her expiration of thick vapors is relieved, then cauterize on the pus according to what is needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread across the patient's body and is manifestly present, then make sure to cauterize that using these types of cauterizations as we have said for the head; apply cauterization on the end of the nose, and two cauterizations on each cheekbone, and two cauterizations on each collar bone, and five cauterizations on the backbones, and a large one on the lower back, and one on the waistline, and two on the shoulders, and one on each shoulder blade, and two on each hip bone and one on each hip bone, and two on each knee, and two on each muscle; cauterize that over all joints of those mentioned as well as the feet, and over each heel of his feet, and over all his scars.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to damage the nerves that are on the base when you do this.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some ulcers are cauterized with a single cautery on the sinus bone and another in the stomach mouth, and another on the gallbladder.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more finely you adjust the cauterizations, the more quickly and effectively they heal; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, like with their ears, because their body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And make sure that the cauterizations are large or small according to the limbs and joints as described by the types of tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, treat the cauterization with corn flour mixed with honey and the other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization for numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is paralyzed or numb and has been treated with medicines and bandages but does not heal, then you should cauterize the paralyzed limb using cauterizations according to whether it merits the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter a little into the thickening of the flesh.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards treat it with ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some ulcers are treated by cauterizing a numbness which affects the feet and backbones and the muscles of the body, and enhances the numbness.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not judge this matter without one who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the treatment of warts that are caused by a fever.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are old and do not respond to any of the remedies in medicine, then you cauterize over that with a cautery for as long as there is a noticeable change in the whiteness and color within the wart until the color of the skin changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with flour from beeswax and lentils cooked in oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, or with a decoction of doves or apricots, each taken separately and all mixed together. And cover a linen cloth with this mixture and place it over the affected area until complete healing occurs.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the treatment of warts.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When warts begin to appear and you want them to stop, then cauterize that with a round circle of the cautery in the course of its movement around it.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And it is said by the wise that you should cauterize with the tip of the cautery in the middle place; however, I do not see this, fearing that it might be an ulceration, and I have already seen some cases like this.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And the pus is treated by cauterizing in a circular motion around it as we have said, or with a solid cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some ulcers are delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess or because of the patient's old age and decay, having few wounds, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of ulcers; then cauterize with a solid cautery circling around it; and then let that which would speed up its maturation take effect.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then heat the form of the cautery like this: and place that in the middle part of the ulcer until the needle penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is left in that place where the pus was, because it brings relief to the arm's circulation; and then treat that until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the treatment of corroding (which could refer to a condition or medical issue causing corrosion, possibly related to skin irritation or damage).
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is the spreading decay in the member, which decays that as wood would burn when fed with dry fuel.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you see that corrosion in the place which suffers from it, then heat solid cauteries as needles and large ones according to what is suitable for that place where it corrodes.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize the entire area until you eliminate all the corrosion and do not damage any part of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let that area rest for three days, and place over the cauterized spots a paste of oil mixed until all the scabs have been eliminated and all the corrosion has been eradicated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with meat healing ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after approximately three days the healthy flesh grows in the place where there was corrosion, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization over what is decayed in those corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion is treated with some doses of acute medicine, which is half in the place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the cautery with fire is for a small amount of pus that has just begun to appear.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you feel it necessary for it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the treatment of warts and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Visible marks on the parts you have of malaise that are called warts, it's a big cause, it enters and affects the skin; and in those, cauterization is done according to two methods, one with fire and the other with boiled water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterization with fire is to ignite the cautery like a small coal of wood, which must be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart in its entirety, and it should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place the burning on the wart, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wart until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wart.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let that rest for three days until you start to feel relief in your arm.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then cover that with salted mussels mixed with salt, and let the bandage stay on that for a night, as it will be eliminated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with meat healing ointment until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and visible marks occur on the surface of the body, especially on the breasts and feet, then you should perform cauterization with water in those places. And take a small tube or iron, or a small coal of wood, place that over the wart; and pour into the tube a little amount of boiling water, move your hand, and turn it around with the pressure of your hand on all sides, pressing the edge of the tube against the root of the wart, allowing the hot water to flow through the root of the cauterization. And wait for the patient an hour while they taste the hot water, then remove that, as the wart will be eradicated from its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus perform those tasks, and bring another close to you from among all those that are within them in their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And treat those abscesses, for the pustules from the boils have been removed by this means of application where the flesh generates.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the topic of the treatment with a cautery for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When treating a tremor due to injury of the nerves or fever caused by friction, or due to any other similar cause, then you should apply the cautery at four points or on each rib; and place one cautery on each rib; and another on their feet, and above their stomach, use an olive oil cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient subsides, and quickens the healing process of the illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 54.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the treatment with a cautery for chest accidents.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are pustules and channels in the body, which are formed of thick corrupted substances; then from the beginning when they appear, you should apply the cautery to every head of the fistula with a fine-pointed rod, the tip of which is extended towards the fire; or with long zizyphus twigs; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some ulcers should be cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they are not hard, and they are broken down by removing the excess, healing those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, you should have this performed near the drainage with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the treatment with a cautery for bleeding of chest injuries due to incisions in the ribs.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When there are ulcers that bleed from a chest injury that should be drained, or from pus bags or the cautery of a body part, then you should do this similarly and it is difficult to keep this from happening.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then when something like this happens, you should touch with your hand to the opening of the rib, and place your hand over that part where you direct this, and stop any bleeding from ulcers within it, and do not let it continue.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place over the fire the olive cauteries both small and large, in number many, and blow on those where there is a spark.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large according to the location and injury in which an artery has been broken, over that vein blow with diligence as soon as you have stopped your hand here, and apply the cautery where it will be cut off and restricted that bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the artery opening when you have stopped your hand and removed the cautery, then take another cautery touching it to the ones that are prepared in fire, and thus do not cease performing this one after another until the bleeding has been restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And make sure that you do not burn the nerves here, and bring about some other mischief to the patient with this.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict this in those, much more so when the artery is large, unless through four methods: or you use a cautery as we have said here; or if extraction cannot be done, which when it can be done leaves its ends burned and thus restrains the bleeding; or it is treated with a stick or with cords of strong tension; or it is laid upon medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and it is strengthened by powder in compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Let him who administers gentle restriction to the patient use cords or through positioning of burning causes and similar circumstances, do not impose anything but a moderate heat.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If it must be done and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open like we have said about stopping in this way over the opening of that vein as we've mentioned, and understand to apply a great compression within which the bleeding will be restricted from the greater part of the injury, and above the rib do not let it be stopped; and above the rib sprinkle with water rubbed with a large coldness until the blood is cooled and thickened; and consider for what needs cautery or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Start the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On cutting, puncturing, and incisions; on phlebotomy and injuries; and their various appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Al-Bucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already discussed in the first chapter about all illness where cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine that causes combustion, and their opportunities and causes, and the instruments necessary for those cases; and I have arranged the chapters on internal operations into the limbs.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter according to that manner, so that the one who desires this may be relieved, on what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I start this, note that in this chapter we deal with what was in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason you should be careful, that in the operation which is in this chapter there are ulcers for evacuation from blood where life must be drenched with the application of veins or cuts on pus bags or on the appearance of discharge or purification of injuries or removal of arrows or cuts on hair and their various appearances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And for all of those, fear and trembling accompany, and in the breast of their animals death lies.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that do not let this happen to you in which the station is, for some times you must use methods of men against the antics of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them is one who will die from their disease and you should regard death for him, also because of the intensity of what he finds in his disease, and because of the length of his illness, and in his disease there is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is the one who gives you his opinion and said it, you hope for that health, and their disease is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so do not consent to that which you see from him in this manner; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite; and do not presume any cause upon this but rather to the certain science that verifies what you must do, and to which success is achievable.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your ailments with prediction and indication to which healing is converted, for in that it provides you assistance on acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God inspires your mind with His understanding, and does not withhold from you direction and protection, for that is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to the chapter on cautery, on treating the head for the feet, so that you may be comforted with what you ask of this and of which you need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease, which is common in children, requires treatment and when the child grows up, their head becomes heavy.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some occur due to hidden causes which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have only seen this disease in children; and for all those I have seen, it leads to death, and thus is the witness of destruction shown in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was full of water, his head would always remain so magnificently, unable to bear the weight of his own head due to the size of his head, and more than increasing humidity leading to death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the membrane and the bone, or it is added from outside onto the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	And when the operation is necessary because the moisture is between the membrane and the bone, and the pus is little, then you should make an incision in the middle location of the head along a crack in the width, with the length of the crack containing two notches where the moisture flows, this being the form of suppuration:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And thus if the moisture is much increased and the pus is larger, then here are these two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is outside of the bone, the sign of it is that you open all the head's seams from every direction and when you press that inside your hand to each parts inwardly, water will be squeezed out, not this which you have hidden.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And when you cut open in the middle of the head with three cracks according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And proceed to extract all the moisture; and strengthen these cracks with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day apply wine and oil, then release the threads and treat the wound with swabs and ointments, and strengthen the head equally; and eat the disease with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And it is another method of incision that you should consider based on the size of the pus and collection of water; some diseases are more in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right side, or on the left. Thus pay attention to where the pus appears and how full with water it is, and perform this according to what best suits you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not cut the artery and allow streams of blood to flow, let the disease pass through this stream of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Second chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of arteries which are near the ears, they're often referred to as being twisted.
Capitol segon.	Third chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are catarrh or swelling in the nose or throat, if it is prolonged and doesn't benefit from medicine treatment, then the preferred treatment here is the incision of these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to incise where the disease causes pain in his head, first cover the area with coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the disease with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and on every other location above those near the ears, they might be hidden, but not in all men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then burn on the artery with an attempt, and penetrate each part of the body from the point of incision into the opening, and thus according to the size of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the needle near your artery and thread it through to the points of incision on its surface.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two inches adjusted, so that when any vein is cut during surgery, a pulse is felt at its exit; it then beats quickly from beat to beat.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	May it be so if the artery does not appear at the waist; then consider that you measure from the elbow the quantity of space for three inches, and burn on the attempt, and enter into the body.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what is measured with the pulse is the amount of blood flow. And let the flow be as much or less than your own pulse, and all of this is according to the amount that appears from the virtue of the thigh and the filling of the artery of the patient.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound; therefore, if there remains on the bone any cause of pus, then cut this out so as not to develop a carbuncle.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with bandages and with strips of linen cloth, and then treat that with oil until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries located in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old headache or severe throbbing occurs due to moisture and quality in the veins of the temples, or old headaches that resemble those, if you treat them according to the methods of treatment in medicine, then we have been dealing with these illnesses: extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as well as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of those is that when the patient raises their skin which is on the temples; and understand the artery apparent in the temple area where it is shown by its pulse, and is hidden even in few people due to the forcefulness of rubbing.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then let the head of the patient be strengthened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you see the artery clearly manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the needle of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you puncture the string with that in such a way that it reaches the artery; and then let blood out into your hand and extract that at the peripheral areas until you remove that from the string and discover those of the tunics which are beneath that, from all areas.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Let it be so if the artery is thin; then wrap that around the tip of a needle, and then cut from that one part according to the length by which its tips stretch and are compressed, and do not allow blood flow; for if they are not cut, the pulse will rise everywhere.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And let it be so that you drain of an amount of blood. Into three parts.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then consider that you divide it into two places with a double strength of thread or with cords long, and do not let it decompose in front of the healing of the wound and allow blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut out the excess which is between two threads; do this either in that moment or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inside the body with a knife until its tips are incised, and remain in place for this half-done work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of shivering constitution; for cautery is caused by those factors that help in finishing moisture, so it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And consider the extraction of arteries that you place on the elbow's edge traditionally, they should be placed over your dry powder rubbed properly, and then let it be treated with dry medicines make flesh grow and within compression until it heals.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another wound blood from the artery escapes, then you should restrain that blood flow either with a cautery or filling it with your elbow, and keep your hand in order to restrain the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you at that time, then place your hand on the area while blood cools down, and soak the area with water from intense cold until its heat subsides, and strengthen it according to what is needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the small amount of pus during artery extraction is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two needles, because you have punctured both areas with a point, and suspend which ever one, by fire, until it reaches the body and divides the vein into two places, so that what is between its tips does not get completely heated up by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the heat of both needles be simultaneous.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the heat of them is more than two needles, then it's better, because if they are sharp like two needles close to each other, and they do not cut flesh at speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than all works even slightly.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two thighs be equal to the size of the pregnancy of that person.
Capitol quart.	Capitalize quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of diseases involving tears and acidic fumes in the lungs.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and it's the disease of those veins which are on the forehead from above, and you don't find any cause for the cure of medicine in this, and sometimes the face of the patient already turns red and feels walking on their forehead as if it were a crawling movement of ants. The lungs emit exhausted fumes, are moistened by this, so that their skin is affected by it, and their eyelids are scratched due to the sharpness of the tears, these old ants become involved in the treatment of such diseases with this operation, and many people think highly of this cure as passing on.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to scrape off the skins which are on their forehead, and then you proceed to make three equal distances cuts across the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut falls into two fingers: one cut is equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small finger's movement which are on the tear ducts, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard yourself against the beginning of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space at each starting point is the size of three fingers adjusted together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And when you have a sponge or a drained cloth, apply them moistly over the areas where the smell emanates.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And insert the tip of two sharp points, this is the shape of the incision for it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which begins from the middle and goes to the second cut.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Surgically remove all the string that's between two cuts near the eye which is above the bone, and make this cut move towards the second cut.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And insert this point in the second incision with another tool which is called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Place the sharp side of that sharp tool on the attached flesh and remove the string, and insert the other end inside where it's behind the bone, and insert this inside so it reaches the second cut, and sever all the veins that descend from the head to the lungs.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Continue the incision to this appearance of the string, and do this in the middle cut between the other cut.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when there's an equal amount of smell coming out, squeeze the areas under the collected smell bags.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And stop at each old cut corner, and pause over those dusts collected in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixed together, and ensure that there's no formation of pus.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day dissolve the stitches and administer a large amount of water or sweat, and then treat this with balm in oil and others inside so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Cap. V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of tears caused by catarrh and the lungs descending from the partitions inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When you have inflammation in one vein and continue it, and sometimes the lungs of the patient are exhausted with coughing, and their examination is deteriorated, and their eyelids are ulcerated and from them their skin, and at the back of the head there's acute pain and consequent exhaustion, then understand through these incidents that the materials and catarrh do not come from any veins originating inside the partitions.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to raise their forehead, and proceed to make a cut in that area on the middle of the forehead, small according to its width (and start from the left temple cut towards the right; and the incision goes inside the bone; extend your hand according to the length of the temple where there's swelling due to chewing), so that the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the smell with a sponge or on dry cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the cut with old cotton or on cloth pieces.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen it from above with dusts collected in vinegar and oil to ensure that no pus forms.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove that and several times that the pus has diminished, then take it for granted that you rub the bone starting from their navel flesh, and then treat this with a drying regimen which makes the flesh resemble a navel, so as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of wax and mix them, and make plaster from them and administer it on these wounds similar to native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Cap. VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment for what infects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that infect the ears are of four kinds, some or it's gravelly mineral matter causing something like gravel, such as iron and salt, or it's plant-caused similar to peas, such as clover or fava beans, or it's fluid-like causing things like water and vinegar together, or it could be a beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when gravel infects the ear or another similar cause among those causes that don't settle in the ear, suspend the ear to the sun. And if you find the gravel, then distill some oil of vinegar or garlic into this and proceed with removing it, make them sneeze so they can experience sneezing sensations, and hold their noses until they experience sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then pause near the lymph node circuit with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the lymph node to its parts, where the heated points are applied against these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you are not heated, then administer the extraction with the tool called the epididymal surgical instrument under which this is its form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is heated with the gesture, well done; and otherwise, then administer the extraction with a slender instrument of few-folded wood.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not heated by this, then make a reed catheter and insert the tip of the catheter into the lymph node and seal around the catheter with wax and with soft, soothing oil, so that it does not open except for the catheter.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract from your leg vein with strong suction, where many heated things match what we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not heated in this manner, then take camphor or vinegar and on which are affixed needles that are just a pinch amount, pause that near the tip of your arm, and then wrap it properly around that for use.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the lymph node with ease, and then remove the lymph node of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not heated by all the causes that we have recounted, then you should cut off that which faces such that it develops into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting that is as follows: you begin by placing your hand on the back of the patient's vein and extract according to the gesture of its virtue, then make a cut between your hands and convert the lymph node to its various locations. Then create a small incision in the root of the lymph node place the grease of the patient under the area that was pressed by him.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be of lunar shape within which it reaches the skin, and if the skin is torn, hold that if possible with appropriate instruments; and around the incision in that moment at a quick pace, and cure that while it becomes healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause affecting the lymph node is one of the fats that grows and inflates it, then administer the treatment and extraction; but if you do not follow your advice, then take a thin spatula according to this shape:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And apply with that the excision of that fat which is inside the lymph node.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And don't apply it when you think that it has already been moistened by the steam of the lymph node, and place that in heated spots, and then extract from those on your elbows or with a subtle surgical gesture, or according to the method we have described, where the extraction becomes easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	And in the water that enters the lymph node cavity, let him use sneezing with coldness at the beginning, and fill his lymph node with a piece of old cloth, and place this water over the lymph node where the water is, and if it heats up like this, well done; and otherwise, then take small thin stones and balls according to the length of this, heat them slightly in fire, let him hold one of these near his arm's lymph node, lay it on a piece of that part and hit it with another stone over the stone which is inside the lymph node.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So continue with the stones while all the water becomes heated.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water starts to heat up completely, take paper or a drumstick instead,. And place one end of it inside the lymph node and extend the other end into fire until its top is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another drumstick and do this many times until all the water is heated, and cut it with a catheter as described previously to remove excess moisture.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	And in the extraction of the beast entering that lymph node, if it is a small one, similarly bigger and resembling it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large one causing pain within the abdomen, then administer its extraction with gestures and instruments, and the cause of it is easier than all other causes that affect the lymph node.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	And in the extraction of worms produced in the lymph node, when you treat it with the water that we have said in the division and within the distillation treatment, do not confirm your treatment, then cover that so you observe the lymph node under the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any worm-causing appears here, then extract that with gestures or with slender instruments. But if no cause appears at all, then take a catheter and stretched out above wide of which this is the shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle tip into the lymph node according to how much can withstand the back of his hand; and then suck vigorously through suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are heated.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not follow it with your advice, then fill and seal around the catheter with wax as we have described; then administer distillations which have already heated up in the treatment of worms, and find this within the distillation treatment.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your discharge be when you pour the medicinal oils into the lymph node with this tool whose shape is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it out of silver or reed, keep it straight, in which there is a small hole, and place something on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore let them be so that they are in the cavity of the canal of the abdomen where it is necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the terminal part of their descent, and then pour oil into the cavity of the kidney, or juice from any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the canal - that one is in the ear - , and place the rod on the stick above and press with your hand until the oil is expelled in the cavity of the kidney and the sick person feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is enclosed in the ear should already be cut with fire a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that the cause which you will distill in the ear should not be too hot, because the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of operations on the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children suffer from small holes in their parents' abdomens that are not perforated. Sometimes this happens to some adults as well; surgery is performed on the edge of the ear by an infection or nothing within it; sometimes such operations are made at the entrance of the tube of the ear which does not allow contact with water, and sometimes they are outside the parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens at its entrance is difficult to treat due to its major dispositions.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you can touch it, know that you place the ear of the sick person on the sun and observe it there.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you notice a visible swelling, open that with a delicate blade of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where the width is small, for which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the blade should have two long sides so that it does not damage the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the operation is due to a cut or wound in the ear or within its meat, then use that with sharp blades and pierce deeply inside so that all the flesh is exposed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the operation is at the entrance of the ear, then take a delicate iron and slightly heat it in fire for a while, and then place that into the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have felt a swelling with what the sick person feels with ease, due to the loss of hearing, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and remember not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place in the ear a bandage according to the amount of the tube which you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take any and press that into hot water, pulverize it over it while it's still fresh and use it; and if the ear is already healed, then know that you should replace that with another which you wrap in a cerat bandage made from fried oil, so that the pustule heals inside; and care for that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If pus should occur, then immerse the sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of Athelizil which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athelizil that affects the eyelids of the men; sometimes they are wet, and other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then know that you should use them with a thimble or an onion, and divide those with a blade from their roots, and then place it on the areas while they are still fresh.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain with pus flow, then you should apply a cautery to those with a small lacunar cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to get close to the cuts and when there are recurrent cases return only if there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are treated with fire, those roots are burned and do not recur.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a large condition that occurs on the eyelids of men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Recurrent cases occur in the eyelids of men; there is a cause that accumulates into largeness due to its strength and hardness, and because of this large size it is named.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And the accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid leaves and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So the operation in them is that you consider this if the largeness proceeds within it from under the eyelid and is felt on all sides; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then cut it across its width, and then extract it from all sides with ease until it evaporates, and then hang that by onion and discard that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If it is not apparent when the beginning of it happens if not pus that penetrates the eyelid little by little, then this does not arise from any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the size is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, it will not cause harm with that which the healing of it restores that and colors it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatest pain is diminishing inside the eyelid you must focus on the inside surface, then lift the eyelid and suspend the biggest pain by using one hand, another which you start with from beginning, press it from every part, and if the eyelid is stretched at the beginning, this should not be a cause for concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the start, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with water where it swells up until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capital X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the treatment, remove in the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is the gray substance that is produced in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially affects children, it intensifies the irritation of those and causes them to have frequent catarrhs; and they cannot look at the brightness of sunlight because their tears run into those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And you should repeatedly speak to those several times on their foreheads all the time, and on their forehead faces while sleeping; and on their eyelids of their eyes they have wet eyebrows, which are already covered with inflammation and a hint of reddening in the eye; and that whenever you press your fingers on that spot, you feel roughness inside those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And in that certain way of surgery is done when the patient pauses their head on your shoulder, then pause a piece of linen and you make cuts with the knife, then draw a circle according to the quantity which contains pus from all parts, then pause that one on top of the other and press all around so that roughness can be added in the middle of the circle, then in the middle of that wetness make a cut parallel to the length, and the cut should not be larger than the cut made in leech suction.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Only in the preparatory stage may you cut through to the sinew entirely until it reaches the pus, where after the white fatty processes will proceed through the cut according to the shape of whiteness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So, extract those with cloths that you enveloped between your hands on the protruding parts, and move them back and forth with your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure not to stick in the cut for fear that the opening does not reach the wound and you don't allow pus to enter.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	Only if no pus appears at the beginning of the cut, then you should adjust inside the cut with a small tube so that pus can flow; and do this too as we have said. And further, soak linen in water, vinegar, and salt, then pause them on the area and strengthen those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And do this by sprinkling salt and placing them in the cavity of the cut, for that which is removed from that wetness.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And further treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Only if an abscess forms in the area, then treat that with plaster bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Capital XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Regarding methods of examining the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When on the eyelids of patients, if these are naturally covered by their own natural skin and are old scars, then these cause problems with the eye leading to various issues such as frequent tears, swelling of the eyelids, and irritation in the area that is causing damage to the eye leading to a condition called ulceration of the eye, and treatment can be done in four ways: or through cauterization using fire; or through acute medicine as stated before in the chapter on cauterization; or through surgery by incision and suturing; or through tubes as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	So cover the area where you place the edge of the ulcer on your shoulder; then turn the eyelid of the eye onto your left hand, and if it is turned, it's good; otherwise, stick a needle in that spot where pus from the eyelid part is present, and let the needle penetrate through that point, and this should be - near the edge of the eyelid where the skin naturally comes together - close to the skin, pull out the thread above on the eyelid, and turn it over to expose.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then make an incision inside the eyelid so that the skin is adjusted to wet threads of the major lacrimal ducts into the lacrimal sac; then extract this thread and place a little powder of camphor or linen on the eyelid, then apply it to the eye like a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However cover it according to the shape based on the amount of deflation in the eyelid, which has already varied among humans, which are those who allow an ample incision from the eyelid based on the extent by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And further make cuts with the thread on the two lines you marked, starting from the major lacrimal duct into the minor lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your cut is close to natural skin as thick as that of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And further put the needle in one of the two corners of the cord, then scrape that completely, and adjust with the cut both lips towards the mouth or the tip of a thin thread, clean it, and if you want to have some causes for this, adhere what is superfluous from the threads on both eyebrows, otherwise do not treat.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And further let the thread cut by the needle heal inside for three or four days, and then treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, let the wound be sutured, and treat it with that which dries and tightens, for when the eyelid is raised you should seal the wound and add to it; more suturing is better. And so say this to your colleagues of surgery.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Moreover, in such cases concerning the patient, it is a good operation and not out of fear for the patient.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another method in diagnosis, and that the eyelid figure appears like a mint leaf, and then lift the eyelid by three fingers separating and gathering according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it's not possible this way, hold the fingers, and if this isn't equalized, then take a needle with thread, insert that in the middle of the figure, and place the other filament near the larger lacrimal duct, and the filament second near the smaller lacrimal duct, adjust between your thumbs the filaments to be equal, and raise your hand with the elevation equal, lift the entire chain over which it is held thus as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two wound lips with suture, and cure that inside that becomes healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if gangrene occurs, you should start with your incision or cut, but treat that gangrenous area with wadding and make it resemble, and with unguents.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some ulcers under the eyelid that their hairs be converted, then know to use on that what we have said about incision; more suturing in certain cases is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Surgery for canals is according to this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure that's inside according to what I recounted; then with skill make two canals or two subtle threads of which length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is more like the width of the nose.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And add each under what is superfluous of the eyelid in the patient, and tighten the threads of each section with firm constriction, and leave that for a few days; when the chain due to constriction dies and withdraws, it will fall out by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it's delayed, then break the chain at the corners, and then cure the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it's solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs don't stick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is how you make two threads as described thus:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And have the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Capitol .xii.	Title: XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Regarding the lifting of irritating hairs in the nose with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and sharp, in the nose then the operation for it is that you take a subtle needle and place at its sharp end a small piece of copper wire, then adjust the ends of it skillfully and pinch each one in a subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the needles be about the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you prepare another subtle needle close to it quickly, and use the ends of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the nose's tip on your own spot, and be close to the sun so that your work may be made evident, for it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the seam of the adjusted hair which needs a tool, and let that penetrate the eyelid smoothly while you remove it from above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair into place and insert that in the seam, and have the hairs one or two or three but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand into that place where the hair is pulled out from the seam in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	And if it's pulled out from the seam and the hair isn't detached, pull it out from the seam in each section with the needle you have prepared for that, within which there should be pulled out from the seam of the thread.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And remove that from the patient's view, then you will pull out the thread and loosen all of it, and leave it for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter than natural, then adjust one of the longer hairs from your own, and lift it up to that, or leave it so that it grows approximately some space, then later you will lift that.
Capitol .xiii.	Title: XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Regarding the treatment of eyebrow lifting which occurs above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it appears in the nose eyebrow lifting, which is when the eyelid contracts against itself or in one of its sections, to the right or left part, due to bad healing of wounds or cuts or cautery burns, and it's called leporine, this lifting can be either intentional or accidental, occurring due to the healing process of wounds or cuts or cauterizations, or through imitation of their malfunctions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation for it is that you cut through this consolidation and separate its lips, then place at it in what's between those a piece of lint cloth, and tie those together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use the patient's cure from the causes that dry up, constriction; for if you do this, it will worsen his illness more than it would have without your intervention.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those remedies that soften like fennel for example. Infuse it in water to which the herbs are added, or with butter, which when mixed with some of the oils, you immerse the affected area in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you puncture all cavities that are not consolidated according to their form at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we call, is simply a correction of an obstruction that does not return the form of the area according to what happens ahead.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIIIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Regarding the cure of obstructions that occur in the eyelid, leave them alone.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This obstruction that occurs in the eyelid, leave it alone, which is called spontaneous obstruction; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental obstructions are caused by injury, cuts, cauterization, or other similar conditions.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the procedure for this operation is: take a needle with two holes and place it in the flesh, making sure to pass it from the left lacrimal into the right one, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then expand the flesh at the junctions above where the needle is, and pull the needle through it, making incisions on both sides of the needle.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the shape of the eyelid returns as desired when he recovers, it is good; and if not, take a thread and place it in the cut, then transform the eyelid using this method, making both cuts at the edge of the eyelid alone.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two cuts be at the intersection of the diagonal incision you made between them, and make an angle among them so that when they meet, it forms their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh that corresponds to the size of the tip left of it, so that you keep the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts, sewing them with the thread of wool; and then cure them according to what we have said about remedies that soften and baths within which they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the obstruction is due to a cut, suture or cauterization, then you should make an incision on the flat surface of the eyelid according to what has been done beforehand.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the heat between two layers as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the entire discourse on the treatment of obstructions that occur above or below, it should flow in your operation according to how it is prepared in the form of obstruction, and this form is in the shape of different parts.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare cavities in every way possible that can fit within them to allow for the return of the shape to its natural form or close to it, and this patient according to what suits him regarding the operation and tools in their most suitable arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Regarding the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many people, it seems that the eyelid is more solid above the white of the eye, and prohibits ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should insert the end of the thread left on the eyelid, lift it up or expand it with your finger.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you make an incision into the adhesion with a fine incision, which is not at the sharpness of the cuts, having made it bluntly small so that the patient does not worry about the operation and retain the incision without removing its sharpness from the eye's edge.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision gently remove that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salty water with which you rinse it; or distil from juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with heat, place wool infused in the white of eggs on the eye, and use remedies that promote consolidation for healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Regarding incisions of eyelashes and the prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that an eyelash can be in two ways, whether it is nervous and resembles a hard thin ciphac; or it is non-nervous, resembling white damp condensed, which when touched, or makes you take with your finger, is removed and the finger is not left on it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both these species only start from the major tear duct and gradually extend to cover vision, preventing light and eye movements.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to act in the incision is that the patient rests his head in its usual place and opens his eyes. Then lift the eyelid with your hand, and then pinch the eyelash with a small duplicate finger and expand it at the junctions above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert a horse's hair or a cow's hair or a goat's hair or something strong or duplicate the end of the needle gradually making it fit in the middle of the eyelash, penetrate that with the needle and hold onto it with your finger; expand this at the junctions above, scrape off from the hair the area around the eyelash which sharpens the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus follow that within the thigh of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And thus you incise the remaining into the root of the tear duct at a fine cut or with small hooks, and exposes the tissue of the natural tear duct in such a way that it prevents continuous flow of tears during the operation.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some of the veins extend from the sun's rays or from the heel, as we have said, and thus they are excised with a surgical blade, this is their form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And remember that when working on the blade, do not touch the corneal membrane and ensure it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Near the incision point, you add a pinch or dab of salt or honey which soothes the area and leaves it to heal within another day; and then you take care of that where something is covered so that it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the needle does not go through the nerve and you cannot insert it in that part of the sun, then using this type of needle, it is treated with medicine, and it heals as I have recommended and advised in this section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to divide that, then open the cleft of the thigh and take a sharp surgical blade according to this form:
am subtilitat.	in subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you notice that it has thinned and mixed and entered into that duct, then pour from your mouth onto the cleft of honey made with vinegar or with raw honey or with ground salt, and let the cleft rest until the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then perform the operation again until everything that belongs to it is removed, otherwise if pus appears in the cleft, then you leave it, and treat from the beginning the pus until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And again perform your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The pain of the tear duct flesh, if you notice by severe damage in the cleft, suspend it until the sun; and incise that part of that, and do not finish the incision so as not to incise continuous flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then pour onto the tear duct honey made with vinegar and let it heal.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On incision of the thigh and on what is born from well-adjusted flesh in the cleft.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some marks on the clefts of some people's flesh are born and overlie so they cover the pupil, or come close or strengthen near the eyelids and harden the eyelids to the parts in front and it is assembled to touch the edge of the eyebrow.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	If the operation is that the thigh places its head in the place of the sun; and then open the clefts of that and collect all that flesh with suitable cuts for water, and do this with a pair of forceps or scissors; and then divide the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to let go of any of what you should perform your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be on which you will divide those or with the blade which we have recommended in the incision of that needle, or with small hooks on which you collect asps according to how their form approaches this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the cleft with salted water, or pour in a powdered vinegar-like substance resembling the powder of corrosive medicines, and place on the back of the cleft with an egg white into which pus can be poured until it is assured to have pus.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there are any causes related to thigh and is pierced by needle, and you fear pus in the wound, then leave the cleft and treat that pus with water that softens that pus, and again perform this operation until it heals, and similarly do on flesh that happens in the cleft of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, make sure you remove all healing of the cleft naturally or by accident, act through iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member suffers this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On collecting the flesh in the cleft.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sanguineous veins are those which are stubborn on the cleft and prohibit it from performing its operation, and develop the cleft longitudinally for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	It is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the cleft in which there is sanguineousness is strong and in it is not another ailment but only sanguineousness, then you collect that sanguineousness.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the thigh to place its head in the sun's place, and then suspend those veins over an arm or two according to your judgement; and let that arm have a fine duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or even have two arms gradually in one body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with fine forceps, with subtlety, and remove the pus bit by bit, until you see that veins are removed from the cleft and have been turned.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to let the cleft touch the ends of the blade; and if your operation is in the middle morning facing the sun, and concentrate on your operation so that you cut only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed, then you let the cold sweat or vomit out in order to reduce its intensity and wash away what has been expelled from the sword.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to gather everything in that hour, then you apply a plaster over the area causing your pain, and leave the patient for several days until their pain subsides and the abscess heals.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And later, treat the patient according to the healer's method until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is how a scythe should be:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Regarding the reduction of nasal obstruction.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat arisati with a cautery or with hot acute medicine following the narrative of their condition and if they are not cured, then it is not in them but where you should make incisions over the abscess, wait for its maturity so that you can extract all the moisture which is within them. After uncovering the nostrils.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the nose is uncovered and there is corruption or blackness in their body, then you should treat them with a purgative such as this:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And this is named rough bark, and it is made of iron indigo, and the cap should be red just like an iron which is made pierced by a saw cut or finely ground (just like in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that over the corrupted part of the nose, and then rotate it with your fingers, gently pressing your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done with several applications, and then restore the area from causes of drying and coagulating.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the area is consolidated and it's in their good body flesh and it has removed the wound from the healing and rested for 40 days, and it's not renewed or healed and doesn't happen any accident to them, then you will know that they are cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it's not in their body but to reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you should uncover from the second nostril with iron or with acute medicine, and when the nose is uncovered, then take care as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The end of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft of it should be primarily extended into the extremity as seen here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the nose, and let that be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little of the way back, and then rotate your hand according to the groove until it penetrates all the nose, and that feels the patient when their hand finds an air outlet as they do with themselves.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	So then restore the area with coagulating medicines, such as those that dry out and harden.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And thus when the flesh and the area have hardened, then that material which excretes to parts further away returns to the nose, so that this is pus more concentrated on the face.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Regarding the reduction of the prominence of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose protrudes in its entirety and does not cause irritation or diminution, then you must soften the face, proceed with it, and place ventilated cuts on the neck's scarification and bleed through good extraction; then place a liniment over the nose made of acacia and aloes, and reinforce the plastering around the nose with powdered paste.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method for the powders is to take cloths of lion's hair, and each cloth should be doubled into four pieces; then make it from those hairs.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those one on top of the other according to the amount which the nose requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And reinforce them with a strong bandage; and apply the suction pads to blood extraction; and leave those suction pads on for one day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If during this time the ligament is softened, then you should make it straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And hold the ligament for one day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the nose has already been reduced, good, and if not, then continue with the plastering and powders and bandages until it is cured.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Regarding the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and it becomes prominent and protrudes outside of the eyelids like a degree of swelling, and its shape is likened to this, and you want to make an incision here, then your operation on them will be as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the slit of the uveal in the part left of the part above, and then insert another needle where there is a double filament from the lacrimal part, and let this penetrate and place the first needle according to its position; and then make an incision on the double filament and remove that part of the uveal from around the needle, and reinforce that with thread.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place wool soaked in egg white over the nose, let it rest until the thread falls into the eyeball.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the nose with what will soften that until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in several applications gather from all parts into the circle of cloth around the nose to adjust its prominence greatly, and then puncture it with a fine needle that reaches to the base of the nose, and drain the cloudy moisture, and descend the nose and enter soon after.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of harelips.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called harelip, is nothing but a disease that comes out in the mouth like water flowing down and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it involves having the patient sit on the padded seat and lean forward straightly. Then take hold of its head with both hands from either side and guide that towards where you see the disease entering your parts, and proceed to dry it out so it doesn't descend further, and end up with lightness, the patient sees these happenings in this way.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if it is not made ready for the descent of the disease with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and proceed to apply a fine spatula over their belly, cutting out a small piece from the continuity of the conjunctiva at the tunica cornea in the corona (within the place you wish), where you remove the disease.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it's been removed, then you boil in the mouth a caudal stream of water that you've mixed with honey or water into which you've cooked fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And proceed to cure from the other causes within until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water in the mouth.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the ingredients of water in the division and which one is suitable to use when explaining the case, then choose this according to your health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then have you make the patient sit between your hands on a hard bench and tie their head securely.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your left hand close to the eyelid of their mouth, if the mouth where there is water is the mouth on the left side; or with your right hand, if the mouth is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take garlic if the mouth is on the left side; or with your left hand if the mouth is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the end of the garlic near the crown by the swell of the tear duct in the mouth's saliva on the side of the nasal discharge, and peel the garlic with its virtue and turn your hand towards it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And proceed to penetrate into the saliva of the mouth and feel that garlic has reached the cause because you see.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And have you make the measure of the path of garlic to the source be equivalent to half the size of the space, which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, this being the crown of the mouth; so that you will see within the pupil with your vision through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place garlic in the spot where there is water and draw it down once towards another direction, and so if the water descends immediately, then you will see the patient sitting up right away with their vision and garlic in their mouth.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And rest for a little; therefore if the water has descended, then you should release that other direction before garlic becomes too hot.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when it is too late and doesn't descend, then you remove garlic with ease, and turn your hand a little at a time towards it, and dissolve a small piece of clear salt from the gem into water; and wash inside the mouth with that water; and place the mouth close to or stop or wool soaked in olive oil and albumin and mix it with the water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Use those that are of our time, they pause on this like thyme with almond paste.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your garlic does not fit into the mouth due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some individuals whose mouths are hard - then have you take the spatula known as almond, this being its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And penetrate with that conjunctiva, and do not let your hand reach the throat, and do not allow it if you make a way for garlic to the subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And proceed to insert garlic as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And finish your task, ensure that the patient rests in a descending sleeping position where they lie on their back in a dark room and forbid all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And rest on the nature of water so that its essence is cleansed, and do not let his head touch either the right or left part entirely.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let it be done according to their disposition within this third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And proceed to clean that in this dark room and expose the cold vision, and show him some causes, and return his condition within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And don't forget to do this at the time of treatments or shortly after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Remember that you must remove this yourself so that water can flow slightly due to great and vigorous examination.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if it happens that there's an abscess, then remember to clean the mouth before the seventh day, and adjust this with water that eliminates abscesses.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	And have you completely remove his vision and rest on the face of his oral cavity which regulates the circulation of his saliva for some days, existing in this dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And proceed to gradually get rid of that room and discuss it regarding its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in an operation, it is not excusable for the disciple to miss seeing some parts, and thus you should be diligent about the procedure.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already arrived to our knowledge some of those that are in the Artach, and someone says that by applying fire to an Ayra in the magdal that is perforated, water will be obtained.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen anything like this in our land which has perfect water, nor is there a legal right to any of the ancient texts; it's possible that this water could be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the varieties of magdalens, so that they may be over those which are unknown to them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of wood or iron properly, and their extremities are of this subtle triangular shape, the sharp tip also is like that; these are their forms.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On healing flesh, nothing in the nostrils.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nostrils are diverse types of flesh, some of which is caused by an assembly that gathers like a scorpion's sting or a pebble in the stomach; this illness is called a polyp which resembles that pebble representation.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from him is crooked flesh, reddish in color; and from him is that the flesh is lion-like not of red color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So in that which is in these lion-like flesh, not fraudulent nor crooked, know to make the patient sit between your hands and place them under the sun, and expose his nostrils, and pinch yourself with a needle in those parts of the flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And remove that from the parts outwardly, and with the part you have understood of those in a sharp fine hole between one part, know that all flesh has been treated; if there is any cause remaining that can be cut off, then use this tool to facilitate its removal so that no cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if you feel pain or have an infected boil, then stop this to the patient; or it's from malignant boils, then you remove and cauterize that area where the infection is removed and all cavities are treated.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And if there is an opening in the nostril near the incision, add water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	And if the nose has opened and there is moisture inside the palate from it, know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the moisture does not penetrate as you feel, then know that inside him is no flesh in the pus above your nostrils where an incision has not been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	And you know to introduce a piece of wood into him where there is any lump, moisten his stomach with water, and pause between each nut the amount of the said or monthly, and make the patient sit and insert an end of the wood in his nostril at the ray or at another cause which might be possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has happened, let him inhale his scent so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and be sitting above his bowl; many children who do these actions when they have the flu often cause illness to those who want to do such things.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And remove the two ends of the stick, one end that sticks out above the nose and the other that goes into the nose, and administer flesh bandage to the muscles that are in the stick, and do this so that you know the flesh is already in the muscles of the stick.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And remove the stick, and place in the nose near the removal of pus a tube, and do this for three days or more so that the vinegar may consume all that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you are treating with drying out, use that method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the device for making nose washes where oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this of silver or of wood which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the material similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cannula like a stick, and the cannula of the device for making nose washes is flat, exposed; at which there is a handle at its backside, with which you take that when you soak in oil or whatever you want from the solutions and extractable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nose washes are expensive: use castor oil, white balm, ginger, and salmon from saffron, long pepper, snail mucus, and ground nutmeg. And you mix with wheat juice and water, they make pills, and let one pill soak in hot water, and put it into the nostrils of the patient facing down.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On swelling near the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Swollen lumps are found near the extremities of the nose, it becomes swollen and oiled over a few days during which the condition of the patient is observed.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this, you should introduce that in the beginning of his appearance, and extract all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place above the spot or cautery or burning medicine which is at the location of him.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its manifestation is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider if it has become pus-filled, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, then do not touch that on iron where an abscess is; those reddened spots under the one who incised this abscess must be avoided due to their great malice towards the one whom that abscess belongs.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is leonid-like and not of dark color, and incision can be done throughout that area, then evacuate the patient and make that incision with caution, and treat the location where it drains until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suturing of the nose and the lips, as well as the earlobe, when continuity is dissolved by disease or by injury.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you encounter a loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, you hardly contribute to that operation but rather in some individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when it comes to any cause of those, you should consider if there's fresh inflammation in its root, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suture and treat that until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of loss of continuity are already separated, and any is made healthy, then take care that you remove each part of their apparent trunk until there's no inflammation.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips for suturing and strengthen them, apply powdered dragon's inflammation over those, and put on oiled wool, place a small amount of diafinicon plaster or another stabilizing plaster on top of the powder, let that plaster heal for two or three days, then remove it and replace the plaster to continue healing until all the scabs fall off naturally, and treat with oil until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method for suture is that you add the lost continuity or like we have advised in the stomach suture using needles, or add the lost continuity with wax and inform it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in their parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Reddened spots under the reddened areas of their lips in their internal parts such as hard abscesses resembling fats, and some are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So you should turn the lips and cut each of those hard areas from every part, then remove the abscess by filling the space with oiled wool until the inflammation is reduced, and then wash it with warm water and treat the area where it was tied until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On incision into the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Large spots appear on the gum that has been adjusted which the ancients called milk. Thus, you should suspend that with a string or whatever you have at hand and make an incision there in accordance with its size, and allow the healthy blood to flow or let the inflammation pass.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place on that area oiled wool or other coagulating or stimulating powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then make another incision and cauterize it there, for the cauterization will not recur.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On tooth extraction with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When sharp edges, grooves, and some spots are blackened inside the tooth parts, and in front of them, as well as between gums, when they appear yellow or white, causing a deterioration process visible through this decay, then teeth become affected.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then you should separate the patient from their servants and place their head in your lap, and remove teeth that show those sharp edges and similar causes with sand while ensuring not to break any important part of them. Do this for blackness, whiteness, and other changes until they become modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And then if it is the same as in those of eating habits change, it's fine; and otherwise, you should continue changing the diet on these other days and the second, until it reaches your desired final statement.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Know that teeth require various forms of restorative materials and figures according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for what reason the razors used for the tooth within are different from those used to shave teeth according to other forms. And these forms of razors should be prepared by you, which you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	And when you heal the tooth for its pain from all ends and in every extraction of it, know that there is no reason to fill up the hole made by it when extracted, which is a substance that evaporates during its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	And when the patient feels that tooth must be removed, you should firmly certify which is the painful tooth, for reddened spots cause pain and fall off from a healthy tooth. You extract that one and until its extraction, the pain does not cease while the unhealthy and painful tooth is still in place; as we have seen this through operation on rabbits.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	And how should you certify which is the painful tooth, and this you know well; then understand that when you scrape in the circuit of the tooth to any spot with hardness, until it dissolves from the tooth and gingiva on every side, and then remove that with your knives or fine forceps gradually until that scrapes off.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then strengthen the patient's limbs with large muscles for good speech or strength, place the head of the sick between your palms so that it doesn't hurt you to touch it, and properly position the teeth according to rectitude in manner that doesn't pierce them, nor cause more pain to the sick person.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not being expelled, then take one of those instruments, and place that under them from all parts with ease and effort in removing this thing as soon as possible.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	May it be if the tooth is decayed or corroded, then make that hollow in which you place your finger and tighten it at the tip of the slender end so that it doesn't get stuck during your compression on that while holding them.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And make that you open exquisitely in the scarification throughout the area of the gingiva and maintain your strength so as not to pierce it and damage a part of him, and return on the patient for the malice that should be greater than his first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do as some ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity regarding the eradication of theirs, which they don't follow what we have advised; the large diseases that they can bring upon men are greater than those that get stuck, and all their parts overgrown, or some of them, or if you extract that among certain bones of the mandible as we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And properly after the eradication of this, wash his mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are discharges of pus for a while, like those that ooze, then sprinkle some quantity of garlic and apply it to the wound; if this garlic doesn't work, apply cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and delicate tongs with which you apply pressure to the tooth at the beginning should be elongated end, short handle, and thick, so that they don't bend when using these.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And should be like those with thick handles so that when you use them they don't bend, and have short ends.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of iron from India with straight ends, and the ends of those are hollowed out where some fit inside each other and open with strong compression, and some of them are shaped like the bill of a bird, which is called stork, and they have strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capítulo XXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	About the extraction of teeth and crushing of the bones of broken jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract the tooth that is stuck, place your finger on the spot and press it with one or two fingers until the area softens; then insert or apply some instrument like the bill of a bird called stork or a kind of tongs into that location.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of those should be made hollowed out like a chisel or an axe.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if these forceps or tongs don't comply with your intention, then place your finger on the swelling and remove all the flesh, and insert this tool called an atali, which is a small lever of this form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short end that's thick on one side and isn't beveled to prevent it from getting stuck.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the swelling is being expelled by this method, it's good; otherwise, help yourself with these other tools among which these are the forms: the shape of the first tool has a triangular end in which there's some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second tool is such that it has a triangular and especially delicate end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already, with this tool having two ramps as you can see in the following form, have been helped:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other tools that precede in the cleaning of teeth; for youth, this tool is made which resembles an ox's horn, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular bent or short end, there's some thickness in it, and it isn't beveled to prevent it from getting stuck.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that other tools for the teeth are similar to these as well as the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May those artisans be wise and subtle in their art, finding for themselves according to what it means to the operation and various diseases of the body; among these diseases are those that the ancients did not describe nor use specific tools for, due to the variety of forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is stuck, then weigh your hand on that at its place with what suits him according to the tools and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the swellings of teeth, and help yourself with this gesture:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be gradual with it if there's any thickness, and secure or hold it in the mouth so that it doesn't escape or flee until the bone is fully expelled; then properly restore the area with suitable medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be if there's a small pus in the bone, then remove that pus and its darkness, and treat the area inside so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of dental prominences above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course and form is set, especially when it affects women more so than others, particularly the venerable ones; therefore consider this: if a tooth has nothing close to another tooth, and there's no possibility of extraction or application of ointment for it, then that one is deeply rooted. More so if it is not attached to another tooth; then you should cut into that with this instrument whose form resembles it, and it looks like the removal of meat from a hog, made of Indian iron having an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your cut is on the part where you should cut into that tooth for too many days due to its hardness, and it doesn't resemble another tooth's prominence.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is excessively prominent to be filed down, then file that with an Indian iron file whose form resembles this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it's all made of Indian iron; the groove follows the tooth. Use needles and files as well, to file down the tooth little by little over a few days through facilitation, so that another tooth doesn't resemble it and gets infected.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And continue to shave there until the end, then adjust that with some scissors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it's a tooth where part of it is eaten away and the tongue touches it, then consider that you should sharpen that groove within which the roughness of that portion sticks out and gets evened up, so that the tongue doesn't irritate it or the words don't get corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Section 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoration of decayed teeth in gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to teeth before their extraction through percussion or impact, and the patient cannot strengthen themselves against what is eaten, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, but your treatment was not effective, then consider that in those that are weakened by gold instead of silver; for silver turns green and remains for several days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the gold should be of such subtlety and roughness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the restoration, take the gold and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth. Let it grow between the two curves of the gold inside each decayed tooth, whether one or multiple, so that it reaches the tissue to the healthy part of the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And repeat this process inside the part from which you started, strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge so that it doesn't become decayed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when strengthening the gold, you must keep the tooth's roots from being disturbed.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And adjust the excess ends of the gold with forceps or cut them off, then place those back in every location while handling it carefully, and blend those and the hidden ones between healthy tooth and decayed tooth, so that it doesn't cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And adjust that like it's been pulled as if with a lever.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it has slipped off or broken, strengthen that or those with another gold piece in such a manner throughout the entire process.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure for restoring two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as these are often tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return one or two teeth in their respective places and they have grown back as we have described, and continue to grow.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not make this mistake, for only skilled artisans understand it well.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And for some defects, one might adapt the bones of a cow as suitable causes for teeth, and they are made in this way like tooth shape, placed at the location where the tooth is missing, strengthened in this manner just as we have said, and stays there serving its purpose for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Section 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the lump in the tongue that causes speech impediments, and prevents speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This tissue in the tongue that leaves you certain defects, or is naturally present at birth, or occurs accidentally due to an illness which has already solidified.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on you is that you open your mouth at the patient's chin; and lift their tongue, then cut into this nerve tissue as far as the tongue's recent position allows.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or knot in that area, and this has been due to the consolidation of an illness, then you apply heat and divide it longitudinally from where you have cut into the tissue until it dissolves the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And remember, do not create a crack in the front of the flesh and cut here so that bleeding occurs.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And after that, wash the remnants of the incision with vinegar or with salt water or with rubbing alcohol; and place your tongue in a place where the patient leaves their tongue every night so that it does not become hardened by another defect.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If bleeding occurs, place your palm over the heated glass; but if blood does not flow, then cauterize the area with a long-rod cautery that you apply to it.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And this cure should be applied with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For removing a hernia, you should leave the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some blisters occur leaving the tongue pustular resembling a small boil, preventing the tongue from performing its natural operation; and strength is increased until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation with you is that you open the patient's thigh sixty in front of the sun and consider the pustule.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find it of dark color or black, hard, as which the patient does not feel a sensation, then do not touch that which is painful.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declining to whiteness, in which there's moisture, then you put the incision on you, and cut through that under the thin pus, and cut from all sides; and if you detect a smell during your operation time, then you stop for half an hour, with this being glass, within which the smell is contained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work within which you have treated according to him, being washed with vinegar and salt; and treat that according to the other treatment until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Regarding the removal of pustules from both ears and that which is nothing in the gallbladder, as well as other pustules.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it affects the gallbladder, those are glands which are gathered like cotton, and they occur outside and are named two ears, which when you treat them with what we said in the division and if they do not heal, then you consider if the pustule is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of smell; gently flatten it until it matures, then either you drain that, or it will rupture on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, thin, and the root of him is subtle, then that which should be considered to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation with you is that you consider, before your operation, if it has rested for the pustule of him, after the rest complete or if it has diminished by some diminution; and then have the patient face towards the sun, his head in your place, open his mouth, and the servant takes between their hands the tongue of him leaving on an instrument noble with which this is its shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or gold, and it should be as fine as a thread.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And when you press on that tongue and show him the pustule, and cover it with your hand, then take an incision and place it in the hollow, and pull it out from all directions as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another thing that you should remove is some cause of the tunics, and then cut with that tool whose shape this is:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it resembles forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that the opening of each one is in the direction of the other, very sharp, which should be iron inlaid.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May it be that this tool is not in your possession, then cut with the flat surface of the instrument which has its shape: It should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one side, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and then when you cut the patient remains clean from rubbing with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that there is a flow of smell, keep clean from the water of decoction of the boil or of pine needle and resemble that among the causes of bleeding so that the flow of smell is contained, then treat him until he heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some blisters occur in the gallbladder other than those two ears, and cut them according to how I have said and directed in the cutting of those two cuts equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I already treated a woman with pustule which was native in the gallbladder of her, that pustule tended to dark color, with little sensation, which had closed the gallbladder of her, and the woman breathed with the throat stretched out, and she had prohibited you from eating and drinking water, and she was already near death if it were a day or two more.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the pustule had become so large that there were two cloves inside which would pass through two fingers.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And I cut it and removed it with one of their incisions, and pulled it out, and the large portion was expelled from him, then I cut that incision which is understood in the other side, then I made him open his mouth, and held his tongue, then I placed the incision in that pustule.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I removed a large part of him, and it only flowed out with a little smell from him.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And absolutely the gallbladder of that woman began to drink water again, and soon started eating food, so I did not stop cutting off a few times for long periods with that pustule, and another pustule formed in place of it, which cut until that was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I open and cauterize the wound on him, then proceed to addition; and later I walk around not knowing what God did with that part from this point.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol Thirty-seven.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the beginning of fever when it is infectious.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When a phlegm attack occurs in the throat, and it is infectious and prolonged, then it is named as perpendicular; and if there is a thick and round lump at that location, then it is called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not confirm your healing, and repeatedly after that you develop a fever again, especially when the fever lasts until you are slightly better, then there's an instance where you should treat that lump which has been added roundly; and if it extends along that length, and is bloody, with a dark color or black, and does not relieve your illness, then suspect the beginning of your fever, because fear over your health appears in that case.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you do that according to the method I've told you about regarding its whiteness and length, make sure to examine your health and press the tongue of him using a tool that fits his shape closely, then place the needle in the new spot and pull that out. Then, cut that with one of two tools as mentioned in the beginning for cutting two veins.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And know that you should not cut that lump but only what is adjusted over the natural end of your addition. If you cut more than this, you will damage his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when it comes to cutting, use the one that we recommended for cutting two veins and cure it inside until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If your health is frightened by the cutting of you, know that you should use a tool during his fear in the cauterization process. The way to do cauterization doesn't have anything else but hot water. You must place the tip of your health on your body and press the tongue with the tool we mentioned, take from this water which we have talked about in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it until a living cause arises, pause not when it is thick or thin. Then fill the cavity of the instrument that has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of your cavity be in which medicine is placed like in a cauterization trench, and place the tool on the medicine over his mouth, your health on its own so that saliva or a moistening comes out from inside his mouth due to the internal medicine, so as not to spread any unnecessary cause through the wound of him and make him feel it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then keep your hand on the medicine and press it for about half an hour until you see that it is being degraded and soothed by the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take and wrap that around the end of the ray, immerse the tip in the medicine, insert the ray into the tube through which the tip adheres to that tube. Do this as many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off about three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do that, and after cauterization clean inside the uvula canal with a moistened tip, adjust what is in the canal of his medicine, wash it with water and cleanse externally with salve, and heal internally with remedies until he is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is safe that you cut and are far from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some inflamed uvula is cured with that which is too subtle for cauterization and cutting, when it's healed through subfumigation in this manner: take calendula, ivy, rue, thyme, powdered gum arabic, chamomile, hyssop, and similar herbs; adjust all these causes or some of them into one mixture, immerse them in strong alcohol and let them boil. The liquid is then strained through a cloth, leaving the residue behind. In the middle of this container place a stick on which you place a metal instrument dipped in wax according to this manner; it should be made of silver or gold.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And immerse the tip in your health's mouth until steam rises to the uvula over the throat, until the uvula is quite reddened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then reapply to those red spots until they dry out. Be careful not to do this treatment right after the appearance of a fever, as it might irritate the fever itself, instead you should declare that there is a fever and cauterize him accordingly.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you don't have this instrument, then take a stick and apply a piece of charcoal at the end of his health, in such a way that your health's mouth is filled with smoke, so the steam from the charcoal doesn't burn his mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol Thirty-eight.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and that which sticks in the wound, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Red spots stick in the wound or thorn of a plant, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So when you extract what is obvious from those, on which the sight falls, because when you press the tongue with a tool in front of yourself, it will be declared to you what is inside the wound.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the stomach, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; this way, any cause related to the stomach will be treated by vomiting; or make the patient swallow a lump of bread or a handful of lettuce leaves or a piece of dry bread; or give the patient a handful of dried sea sponge and tie it firmly with string. Then have the patient pass this through their mouth, until they reach where their spinal column is and are able to pull out, then it will be treated by vomiting.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a toad and hold it with your hand tied, place it inside the table and gently remove it; or take a reed and gently put it in and gently pull out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you are unable to treat those causes as we have said, then use a lead tool according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it's larger than small, and at the tip of it there is a cavity which you should insert into its throat to facilitate swallowing.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And have him raise his head, and watch that you touch the inside of his throat's opening, to ensure it reaches his body and to apply pressure where needed on the bone or spine, or that the doctor applies their hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But have the patient apply honey, because of their expertise in locating the site of the attached cause and insert it downwards, then have them pull on their hand towards the tool, all according to the amount prepared within which they need to treat by vomiting.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of gallstones attached to the stomach.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When gallstones are treated as we have said in the section of recovery with medicines and it does not respond, consider instead looking for gallstones in the stomach of the patient under the sun, since you should see if their tongue has been affected by an instrument that we previously recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So when you find the gallstone, remove it properly whether it's small or through subtle means.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it's not possible for you to remove it from there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the stomach of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron rod, and do this as many times (until the gallstone is dead and leaves the stomach) and make sure the patient drinks only water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a glass full of water, open the mouth of the patient in it, and wash their mouth with that; do not swallow any cause from there, instead let the water sit on your hand for an hour or two while washing your hands, until the gallstone senses the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it's not treated by vomiting as we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with garlic or with castor oil using the instrument that we recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and see what happens next.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in fumigation involves taking an oil with ignited charcoal inside it, covering the oil halfway with a cloth that has a string attached to it. Place the end of the instrument into this string, then place the oil under the fumigation. Have the patient hold their mouth at the tip of the cannula and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not cause vomiting until you know that the fumigation reaches the gallstone, for when the gallstone will sense it and react accordingly.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't work, then you should repeat the fumigation several times. Keep the patient from drinking and eat salty foods instead. Don't drink water either. It's necessary that this treatment be done properly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is how the tool looks when treating gallstones in the stomach if they are visible; it's somewhat like a pair of forceps, but with some curvature instead.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	It is placed at the stomach's opening, and its tip resembles the bill of a stork; it is handled like a pliers. The ends are sharpened with a file to ensure that when any object is grasped, it doesn't slip away.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	This concludes our discussion on the treatment of boils and in the section about them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Boils are specific types of skin swellings that occur as part of certain diseases, according to memory from various sources in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	They are various in terms of their location and nature, depending on two methods. One is the method related specifically to boils themselves; it involves taking into account the moisture content.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second method relates to areas where bodily accidents occur. If a boil occurs in the head, it's different from one that might occur in the anus; similarly for boils occurring on flesh versus ones at joint locations. Each has its own procedure for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Some boils require that they not be punctured until they are close to ripening or maturing, either inside or in relation to them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other boils require that they be extracted when they cross over and are not yet ripe according to their own maturation process. For instance, boils close to joints; the moment a boil gets close to a joint, its nature is prolonged until you can place it where it affects the circuit of that area, causing corruption of the muscles or nerves in that joint leading to contraction of that limb. Or if there's a boil near a main member, and if you delay the puncturing until it matures too much it can affect the main member; or if it's close to the anus, then puncture the unripe one; don't extract when you see bleeding from non-digested food but rather that which is close to the anus as it could extend into the digestive parts of the anus and create a fistula. Or if it's in the tip of the boil that isn't cured, do not puncture then either.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Knowing when to perform the puncturing of the abscess is crucial, which happens when it has ripened.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it ripens when the pain and fever subside, and close to the reduction of sweating and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that it's time to puncture near the pus point of the abscess and where pus comes from the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Puncture at the right length of the flesh or body, when abscesses are in parts of the joints or feet, and on spots of boils, along the tendons, nerves, arteries; and, finally, everywhere equally where they don't reflect. In those that do reflect, puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshly area, then it's that you perform the puncture inside until digestion of it has been confirmed according to the meal, as we've said; if you pierce there before this, it extends the length of the pus and induration, and hardens the lips and depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Such abscesses should be punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity dictates, or according to what each member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And know that you should administer small punctures for small abscesses, and large or wide punctures with pus-filled areas according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And for other abscesses in which you should return the obstruction and seal it up when done this way with bread, as soon as it sustains it, like what happens with many of stones and lumps.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And for those that are cut into a section with three corners; and for others which is where it's cut like the shape of an olive leaf, as in the abscesses of gout.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And for them there are sections that are administered round and lunular, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	For the one that doesn't have this like superficial lion abscesses, it's known that you should puncture there with superficial puncturing, or flatly enough only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is thick and has already hardened into healthy pus, puncture it and don't worry about extracting all the pus at that moment; take out a part of it first, then allow the abscess to settle in another day, then extract a larger part, and let it drain until you make cuts and drain according to stages within which it is drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially so if the patient is weak from fasting, or a young woman in her period, or a small child, or an old person in decline; when the animal spirit's unhealthy pus is resolved with the release of healthy pus, and hardens the body, then you should operate them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and in the place of your puncture where you are puncturing these abscesses, know that you cleanse them, considering whether the pus in the abscess is small or a flat section; then administer remedies as they require or according to ancient practice. And if the abscess is large, and the wounds from the punctures are indurations, then it's known that you should place metal in each trough until they reach time.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess you have removed a part of the obstruction or have hollowed out that part in the channel, then it's known that you should complete it with old string or thread made from linen fabric, as when you are pulling breads or thongs, moisture; strengthen it on the third day; then proceed and treat that until what cures under the ointments becomes healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if it happens that there is blood flow during your operation, then you administer water washes and vinegar in the ones where you immerse a linen cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding spots.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the blood flow persists, then it's known that you should administer treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in places like this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it's during winter, and the site of the abscess is in an area with nerves, then you should coat powders in vinegar and oil, and place those on the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it's in summer, and the areas are fleshly, then you should apply ground powders with water and oil or with vinegar and oil, all of which is rubbed until the third day, as we've said, and then it's known that you let the abscess drain and cleanse that and administer care for its healing under what suits it until it becomes healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what's necessary for the knowledge of treating abscesses universally, but according to the path of distinction that I've already said about every abscess on how treatment proceeds for it under individual chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	The chapter is about the section of abscesses that occur in the channel of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the channel of the head, small abscesses occur, which are special nodes containing linings that are characteristic of them; and the characteristics of their indurations.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come pus, and those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those ones that contain moisture resembling dust, and are like them; and of those ones that are hardened, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those ones, there is no fear, just as you should extract those without causing dissection of arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in this section is that you apply the tool of that form to your eye as closely as possible, which is called an intermixture, so you know it contains something.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if what is contained is moisture, then divide that in sections according to length along the surface section as shown below:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Start at the section of line .B. between the lines .G. Then as the moisture is drained away, then you remove that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause from all, for when it returns after being removed, if there is any cause left from that.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the affected area in Egyptian oil if it is present, and if not, in water with salt; fill that with the wound and leave it to rest for another day, when you will dissolve all that has corroded from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian oil on that skin again and again if you require it, provided you are confident that there is not any cause of corrosion from that skin; then treat the wound with oil until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if pus contains fatty nodes, then you should incise there according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section with a cradle shape, make cuts between two edges of the section and cut all around it. Strive to extract the tissue which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If when you are operating there is opposition, then do what I have already instructed you to do first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly do this for the soft and cured wound sections as well as in their treatment according to what we have told you; the section over a soft and cured wound is a little bit of pus, which has few injuries and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these pus pockets are in the head in certain men for whom there is not any moisture; this cause is that I incise on a wound in the head of an old woman and pinch away the pus like a hard, white pebble which could not be drunk. If with someone else it was done to such an extent, it would have healed the wound.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And in the other accidents in the head besides this one, like those pus pockets that come on the heads of children and behind the ears, it's just the section of all these is superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the incision at the lower part of their body where it can relieve the body from the parts with low pus.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those according to what is suitable for the process of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of section concerning scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These pus pockets are found in the neck and behind the ears, as well as in the armpits; some are found in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Those are the ones that occur in the neck, and they are masses that originate within themselves, and all scrofula of those is inside their own tissue, just like with the lumps and pus pockets on the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofula are masses; some of them are soft, and others contain moisture, while others are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And in that one where you make good preparation with the touch, whose color shows is proportional to the color of the throat and is visible everywhere, it's not attached to the neck muscles, nor to the veins, nor to the pulse, and it's not rounded when you incise it from the dry surface above to the part below on the line of .G. between the line of .B., you then burn that completely throughout the area, expand the edges of the throat tissue in a single piece, or use pieces of onion if you need them as we have described for the pus pockets in the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And more caution is needed to not incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the tool is not sharp enough that your hand fits well during the incision or calms down the patient, then do not incise what is unnecessary; if you were to cut a vein or pulse and are prevented from completing your operation, then stop the searing of inflammation or other powders that still cause discharge, strengthen the wound, and leave it for when the inflammatory pus subsides and the wound becomes softened, then start turning into pus.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is completely drained away.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	And return to your operation as soon as you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask yourself if there is any cause of the other small scrofula as described by me; therefore, incise and cleanse those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the vein of the large scrofula, then you should not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before the end when you have made it with a firm fold, and let that one fall by itself without your aid.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian oil, and then treat that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, then make sure you adjust the two edges of the wound and create just enough pus so there is no excess or abnormality.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you find there is excess pus due to the size of the scrofula, know how to drain its source, extract that lump, perform suturing, and do as it has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	For those of the scrofulas containing wetness, puncture that at the superficial opening where it appears in your area of maturation for them, and place an opening for the pus below their body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then perform puncturing, prepare and resemble those, so that it corrodes what is decomposing from the pus.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you find that the wound has already healed, then treat it with meat-generating ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Title 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Section on the section of the boil occurring within the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this section in the inguinal area, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the description of the operation of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	If in men there is a curvature, then avoid the removal of the inguinal area, because if it's done incorrectly, all the veins and major arteries are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	If those who have boils in the mouth or groin or both ears, when the inflammation is not in the canal, use the section of the inguinal area to avoid losing it which is done through puncturing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want that, puncture the inguinal area leaving three circles of the inguinal area's circles, or four in the smaller section by latitude for that which is between two circles by quantity, that the section should be on the skin, not on the cartilage. This location is suitable for operation as it lacks muscle and its blood vessels are inside them.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, then at once extend the groove of the groin to one side, and later make an opening in the groove that reaches the canal. But avoid blood vessels if you see any from those areas.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then puncture the muscles as we have recounted; and it signifies on the section of the canal by the swelling which is from that expanse to what is of its burst, and by the rupture of the vessels.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the time is ripe for that puncturing which is feared, add two layers of the groove of the wound, and cut only the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And later administer medicines that cause new flesh to grow until it heals.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	As Albucasis stated that the full description of the operation which we have recounted is merely this: some of those boils have reached the groin of the groin, and the groin has gone into death, and his life was cut off. Some would puncture the epiglottis so that the air could pass through their throat over the area of the wound for a breath, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason it is commanded to leave the wound open until the mischief of the inflammation is consumed; and the mischief of him lasts for three days; and then it is commanded thus with the wound, treat that until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen with my own eye is that a servant caught a cat and kept it in her groin, and punctured part of the canal of the lung there, and I was summoned to treat him for this. He died as if he were among the dead, opened the wound and bled from what was inside the wound little by little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So I confessed that it had not pierced a vein or artery, and the wind escaped from the wound, and treated that until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it didn't happen to the servant girl nor in the vessels at all, and later return after several days to treat their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And I say that there is no fear in the section of the inguinal area.
Capitol .xliv.	Title 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Section on the section about boil occurring outside the groin, which is called the groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This boil named as groin hernia is large according to the body's color, and moves in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it follows two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there's no need to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental follows two manners of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to boil which happens due to obstruction of an artery, and in that there's fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And don't assume he would get sick from it like iron unless the lump is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should touch it and investigate it as directed, and if you find that it is similar to fatty nodes, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then puncture it like a node, extract it with that which contains it in the skin and serosa membrane; but if not, then thoroughly examine its entire being, and later treat the area with what cures during healing until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Title 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Section on the types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes there are various kinds, and I have already described all the kinds in detail.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And I will recount this difference between a node and an abscess to clear any doubts.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then I say that in fever and heat and strong pains within which suppresses the boiling of excess; and the process of decomposition is completed when at that time the fever, pain and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May it be known that there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and consider that lion's tooth which is in the upper stomach.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and the start of their condition is like a sickness and is done likewise to emptying oneself, whether more or less, and they depend on two species, fat or containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then consider, when you come to the treatment of disease, that extract it and inquire about its beginning at the point which is called penetration, according to how its form will come in the head which is close to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all diseases, and you should take hold of that point and introduce it into the pus-wet spot which you find in the abscess, and you will twist your fingers inside little by little until you know that the point has penetrated the chain.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finish your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the penetration and consider what is left in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture escapes, regardless of what its color is, then you should incise it on the superficial section as I said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture left from the penetration point, then you know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And over it, on it, make an incision in the form of a crook according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Just as you have been taught, and suspend it on the cord, then scrape away the chain from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or bag over that if possible, and remove that cure from the disease.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	May it be that if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that cure, and spots drained accordingly, then you extract it piece by piece without leaving any cause for concern.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	That if some or too much remains from it, the disease returns according to what is right.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that some small part remains from it, then complete the disease with some corrosive and sharp powders, strengthen the disease, place over that which is a pus spot cauterizer, cure that before another treatment until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large disease, then cut both of its lips and cure that according to what is inside.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May it be that if there is a pulsating one in opposition, or not-pulsating, then you cut and treat the area corresponding to the trissat which is the vein, smooth that stretched part for two days or three until the disease subsides and stops the boiling of the pus; and then return to incise what has broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Regarding the necessary forms for an incision and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of penetrations, and they have three species, from which one is large, and from them there is another that is smaller, and from them there is a small one.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of large penetration is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of moderate penetration is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small penetration is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them with iron, with lead, with the ends of dropped extremities suitably, so that I tighten the inner part in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiences, and they have many names, and one of them is called red.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they have three species, which among them are large, moderate, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experience, its form:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the moderate experience, its form:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experience, its form:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is necessary that they be for those abscesses, diseases, and fistulas, and boils so that among them are from the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are rounded tools, large, lion-like, just like large needles to which the thorns are sewn, and they are made of copper, or bronze, or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of citrine metal.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are tools like black feathers, which it is remembered that for those the fistulas should be opened in the cavity where reflections are made, that they should reflect on their levitation at those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they have three species, where some of them are long, and others are moderate, and the others are short, according to the amount of width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large experience made of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the moderate experience made of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small experience made of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of special spots, which among them are some simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they have three species: large, small, and moderate.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from these there are hooks, and they have three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those there are two curves, and they have three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them there are three curves, and they have three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single large stone, that's the shape of his:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of half a stone mixed:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small single stone, that's the shape of his:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of an irregular large stone:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of an irregular half stone mixed, that's the shape of his:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of an irregular small stone, that's the shape of his:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large stone having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of an irregular half stone having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small stone having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large stone having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an irregular half stone having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small stone having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels on which cuts and slashes are made to the glands and abscesses, and they have three species; among them, one is large, irregular, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a scalpel (large):
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the scalpel (irregular):
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of the scalpel (small):
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those (scalpels) on which cuts are made are sharp, while the other ends are not sharp. They are not used in such a manner, but rather when performing incisions in the excision of glands there is the fear of lacerating a vein or nerve, and through these treatments improve the patient's condition and find tranquility for a short time due to this adjustment that you find during the excision of abscesses.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of needles, they have three species: large, irregular and small, like thorns.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a needle (large):
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a needle (irregular):
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a needle (small):
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from reeds and resemble arrows on which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it's in the tip with a pierced end and an inner tube hidden, and there you go to the divisions inside and outside, as you want, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas that you hide between your fingers are used for puncturing abscesses and not allowing the patient to feel discomfort, they have three species: large, irregular, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those (the medical instruments mentioned previously):
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of the suction devices on which blood discharge from diseases is removed, they have three species: large, irregular, and small; these are their forms.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of reed like a citrus fruit, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these varieties of suction devices, large, irregulars, and small ones, because with those you can remove the blood discharge from diseases quickly in necessity, and then when your first medicine did not help.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to remove blood everywhere in the body, and use them only on fatty areas, just like on the bumps of the lungs and thighs, and on the lumps of the breasts, nipples, belly, kidneys, and similar to the fatty bumps.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some treatments are made with those instruments and smaller pieces resembling pricks according to this form; when blood is removed through phlebotomy, or in case of laceration of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some treatments are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On treating the breasts of men which are assembled by women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some treatments cause the breasts of certain men to swell when they start becoming hairy, and similarly make the breasts swell. They are assembled by women's breasts, and are comparable to pubic hairs, distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who seek this, know that you should incise these according to the lunar section on this form, from the line of 'B' into the line of 'G', then thoroughly scrape the roughness, then fill the sore spot with ointment medicine, and adjust the two lips of the sore spot by sewing, treating it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast drops into the parts left and is softened by its size just like in women, then it should be split into two halves of pus there, with two cuts resembling a lunar figure, each contained within the other. The larger line should contain the smaller one according to this form between the lines 'B' and 'G'. Then scrape the seam which is between the two lips of the sore spot, remove the swelling, and administer what we have said about sewing and powders that are necessary in the treatment until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what should be cut due to the discomfort of the patient and blood discharge, then know that you should immerse the sore spot in corrosive ointment and treat it until this corrodes which is related to fatness, and similarly heal it when it has healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the piercing of abscesses that cause vibrations.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that cause vibrations are from the species of scrophula, hard ones, which contain a ball that is squeezed.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And among those are some that contain moisture; and for those containing moisture you should make incisions according to this form: from the line of 'G.' to the line of 'B.' And when all is drained out of the ball of health, then you complete it with a cold compress and treat it on another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And after that, let the hand be kept and treated with a suitable ointment for water, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess from the glands and the catarrh is present, then you cut on that surface as we have said in the section about catarrh, similarly.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound spreads to an extent that causes fever, then administer with cautery as we have mentioned previously.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on abscesses that occur due to surgery or through veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the wound from surgery is ruptured and the blood clot (causa) becomes solid under it, then pus abscess occurs. These are the signs by which one can determine if inflammation or an abscess is due to an artery or a vein: when an abscess is caused by surgery, it extends deeply into the body; and when you press on the pus area with your fingers, you feel a whistling sound in that region.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And the one that's due to a vein is easily recognized by its outward manifestation.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And this section concerns such an abscess, particularly when it comes to distinguishing its symptoms, and in the case of lymph nodes, and in the throat, and in localized body areas; and it is large, therefore iron should be avoided as a treatment for it, and that which is located at the extremities, or at the head, should have its treatment avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	For one that results from swelling of the arterial orifice due to inflammation, divide in the section of the artery longitudinally; and then cut into the vessel with scissors and cut near the artery, delivering from the tunics where it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then take care of that needle and allow it to penetrate into the other side, strengthening the wound with thread twice in two places -- this causes you to feel when removing both wounds which are located at the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then pinch the area that is between two ligaments inside the body where all the pain is until the abscess dissolves.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then apply treatment where pus is formed until the ligaments fall; and later treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it's an abscess due to vein section, then consider having your hand positioned like this that touches the area of the abscess at the site, and insert the needle into the place you have with your hand, allow it to penetrate; and in that thread, make a double loop inside until you extract that from the other side, and later tie up the abscess with two ligaments as I've told you on that thread that has two parts at both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that we might remove the thread, then insert the needle into that area with this needle all through the abscess until you reach the initial location of the needle, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then drain the abscess in its central location until you reach where all is pus, and then cut off the excess of the cord, leaving what remains from that area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and later apply the treatment that is done with bandages and ointments until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess caused by nerve torsion.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	It occurs just like an abscess in arteries and veins, and similarly, when it occurs due to pressure on nerves or unnecessary work on them, and by similarity.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the method is as follows in areas adjacent to the joints or at the base of the fingers, or anywhere where the joints are swollen.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a heavy abscess, and its color resembles that of the other body, and it occurs in the larger parts of its disposition seats, and when pressed with vigor, you feel numbness resembling fainting in the patient.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that extends deeply into the body, and here it releases pus everywhere, it swells in all parts and does not advance forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So for those that occur at the joints, do not apply iron to it, as strong remedies will cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	For one that is on the head or forehead, allow the pus to drain through a slit.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	And if it's an abscess with little pus, then take care of it at the corners and cut off that root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it's large, then suspend it with a string, scrape off that area, and keep it elevated; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 50.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Section on the chapter of abscess that occurs due to coughing in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Notice these symptoms often found in the stomachs of such individuals and other parts of their bodies that are referred to as fungal due to similarities with fungi; here is where the root is thin but the top is large. The lips of those involved are red, it's from those who have a small abscess, and it's from those which have significantly increased in size.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one myself where in the abdomen there were two parts that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with their small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of these were inverted and split open, moisture flowed from this continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I insert and thoroughly examine each in the foot up to eighteen inches. And the other up to two inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation during their insertion, you consider if the patient is wet, and the color of the wound is white, moist, with subtle redness; then you insert up to the joint line, and apply a point cautery over your own presence, where the heated part should be used to expel the infected section. And if the infection is there, apply the cautery to that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you find the patient fearful and alarmed, beware of inserting with iron; instead, take lead in its molten form, heat it over that wound, using the method we have described; leave that area for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the seam of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop reinforcing the large lead until it has detached and fallen by itself from that part.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if the wound is thick with pus, then during its insertion there is some cause for fear and alarm, especially in those located in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It's possible that you will detach much pus from it, and then apply the cautery to prevent it from returning.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then treat that until the wound has healed completely.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And remember not to insert anything of a dark color, with little sensation, and under careful observation; for such are likely to be cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come back with further reminders soon.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of the belly button wound.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The belly button wound is caused by various reasons; either through cracks in the stomach that's above the abdomen, and when you open the skin or intestine according to what should happen in other ruptures; or due to infection which flows from veins or arteries as previously mentioned, or due to constricted breathing in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it's due to a tear in the stomach and when the skin opens, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and there is intense pain, and it appears at various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then that place towards which we have recounted is in your belly with greater intensity, and when you press on that area with your fingers it disappears; and later returns. And forcefully apply lubrication and intense work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If due to wetness, then it's painful and doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if due to infection, then these signs appear on the abscess turning blackish and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it's caused by nothing but flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and its size indicates a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's due to wind, then touching it feels painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And in the operation concerning it, you consider if the belly button is due to arterial or venous infection, or due to wind; henceforth refrain from treating it where fear and alarm occur as we have instructed in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the belly button is due to an intestine or skin problem, then command the patient to hold their breath and stand spread out. Then test in all directions of the belly button area, and command them to face you between your hands on each side. Also encircle with a lead thread around the perimeter of the belly button over the place where you tested; extend the size of the abscess to both sides up to about two inches; apply strong or soft lead around the circuit and use the method of applying it straight down.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then open the center of the abscess spreading over the membrane and insert your fingers into that spot; if you have found or can see the intestine through it, then you must remove it immediately and push the intestine inside towards the inner parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the skin, then take it with a thread; and remove any excess of that (probably referring to pus or abscess material).
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it's contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and proceed with the operation again. Take two needles and make them into strong threads, then insert the needles into the circuit you made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, causing them to penetrate. And reinforce the abscess in four parts above the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, keep the needles in place until you can place extended flesh over it and let it fall naturally; or insert that when it becomes thinner and settle properly, then treat that area with what heals from the ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the belly button is caused by nothing but flesh or due to wetness in it, then you should open the abscess as we have instructed and eliminate the infection or the moisture found within, which you will find there. Then treat that area with what heals and reinforces the location.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As we have stated in the division, about different types of wounds and how they are treated using medicines, that healing with iron without causing it to be ulcerated is desirable. We have also discussed wounds generated through the negligence and carelessness during their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And it was said by the ancients that some diseases of children are in places where their eradication is possible, thus such as in the brain which is in the breast or on the thigh and similar to the parts allocated for extraction throughout, and more so when they start small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and severe, don't try to heal him, for I cannot cure anyone of this once it has reached that point, nor have I seen anything else, nor has it been transmitted to such a state.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on him is as we have said, that you proceed and leave the patient pure of black fever, removing some diseases, and then aim for that, if it's obstructed I replenish any apparent manifestation.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and prepare by cutting the veins that lead to that; and then hollow out from all sides with good excision so as not to damage any cause of the patient's pain.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the cure flow, and do not remove it lightly, press the spots, and cleanse the pus completely with your hand or with an instrument from which you are able among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if it causes you an opposition to thick pus inside the vein or artery, then cauterize that within where the flow of pus has ceased, and then treat that in the other treatment where it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitalize Liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of hydrocele cure.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended in the division, of the species of hydrocele water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of them we use medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is none other than the species of mere heat alone, and it does not approximate to the species of tympanists nor to the species of erysipelas, for this one is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydrocele tympanistre with medicine and does not respond to your treatment, then consider that if the patient has already developed debility or is affected by another malady other hydrocele, thus if it's in their chest or belly like those, then be careful not to treat them with iron as there might be a fear about this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you turn the patient's condition due to excessive vitality, and in him there is no other malady but hydrocele alone, neither child nor old, then the method of the operation for him is that you lift the patient between your hands, and you minister him so that his belly protrudes from him with your hand, expel the water towards the exit part of the scrotum, and take a thorn spade according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be two long parts with acute ends, like thorns. However, it may be in him of some shortness little by little, so that during the operation with this one you do not penetrate into the intestine, and that you handle this gently.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydrocele is from parts of the intestines, then you should examine that in the section near your navel for a length of three fingers to the exit points, in front of him towards the scrotum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness in the uterus, then your examination area should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the cause of his condition is due to milk, then your examination area should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your examination area be on the side where the patient wants to relieve their urine, in order that excesses do not accumulate at that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then puncture the entire canal with the instrument, and insert into that area, lift your hand to the thorn between the canal and the scrotum, and you scrape this area; if it's the size of a nail or around.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture through the scrotum so that the thorn reaches the desired location, which is where the water accumulates.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a delicate silver catheter. It's made of silver or horn or bone, where at the lowest part of its body there is a small needle, and on its sides are three needles: two from one side and one from another side; and made it so that the end is cut like a feather according to this manner:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the top of its end is a plug that once the instrument reaches the water starts to come up right away, so it drains a medium amount of water from the mouth. If you drain too much before this, it weakens the patient due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or you might cause them to faint leading to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And drain from it according to the vitality of the patient and according to what you understand about the disposition of the patient's condition regarding the vitality of his pulse and the goodness of his health.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and collect the water that causes this issue; it is due to the canal which holds back the needle that you place over the scrotum where you have noted that you should puncture it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on another day if you see that the patient tolerates this, and extract a small amount of water each time, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to remove too much water but only a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient's life and let out a large quantity of water, then treat that by burying them in hot sand, applying sweat baths, and waiting long under the sun; and treat that with drying medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply a cautery on the stomach, and heat up the bile close to water extraction, according to what I have read in the preceding text.
Capitol .lv.	Capitalize: Lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the treatment of children whose kidneys have not perforated the urine locations.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children exit their mother's womb, but do not perforate the head of their mixture (or they are pulled straight or do not reach their location).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So, when the child is born, make a small incision on the perforation for them as soon as possible according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place a small thin lead rod inside the child and hold it in place for three days or up to four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, let them relieve themselves; and then return that (the lead rod).
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the lead, it may be possible that the urine which goes over the location does not close this seam.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Take care of that which when the child is pulled straight uses a lead rod as we have said, for too many days inside until it grows large.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Take care of those in which the pull is not at its location, let it be, the cause of which is the same as that of others, that when they are born and the child pulls it up through the head of their penis, so that they cannot urinate inwards; and it does not concern their generation, because their sperm cannot reach their mother according to rectitude, and this is a malady that stops at birth.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation for them is that the patient lies on their back, and you extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vigorous extraction, then cut the tip of the head of the penis at the place of the prepuce with a sharp knife, as if it were done with a feather or without touching any part; so that half of the blood flows like the head of the penis and that the pull falls into the middle location according to how you do.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember that in your operation for blood flow, what kinds of blisters occur here; and hold it to them at this point where you cut the blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Capital: LVII.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Regarding whiteness which occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis and pus, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Blisters occur in this whiteness on the foreskin, it is an indication of impeded flesh growth.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, take care to hang on a thin string and cut that between which that extends completely; then place it over that small area submerged in Egyptian oil; then treat it with oil until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the whiteness is malignant, observe its color, then you should apply cautery close to where it begins and at its base.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Take care that if whiteness is in the foreskin at the head of the penis in uncircumcised individuals, and one part of the whiteness is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside; then you should remove the whiteness which is inside until it consolidates; and afterwards you treat the outside part, so that when you treat this time the foreskin, there's no guarantee that it won't be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also blisters occur in the testicles and on the foreskin with blackness and hardening; then you should remove all that has already been degraded, that is about to corrupt or that has already corrupted; and make a line over it around that area, which is treated with honey, which is rubbed with flour made from bran, rye flour, and sieved flour.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that with the other treatment until it heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Take care if there's blood flow, then apply lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The application of youthful cautery is in two simultaneous positions, that is during blood flow and when the wound becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed completely at that time, then you should insert a lead catheter into the inner part of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Regarding the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (this adhesion occurs only in that which has a sa-like foreskin, and on it circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) you should scrape with blunt blade until the lymph dissolves and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those thoroughly, then you should scrape with the tip of some cause from the head of the penis and foreskin, and thus it is that when the foreskin, when it is thin, fort light it is perforated by its thinness slightly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of its thinness, which has already been moistened in water to prevent any other blistering.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it is treated with a firm bandage until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 77.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the creation of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution like other diseases for continence: rather, it's because of our operation and will, and more so in the case of children compared to that, it is necessary to assign better operations and loss more lightly towards health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in some of their free members where they don't use it in their laws, but rather because we have acquired this through experimentation, which is the reason why I have found that most artists and barbers use circumcision and castration on the penis and testicles; and they use a ligament for the male and an incision for the female.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these methods and found that better circumcision on foreskins works best, using the ligament of the male and an incision as in circumcision like the female. This method avoids the chain further up, where the chain of the prepuce is made of two tunics, and allows the lower part to remain. The foreskin's tunic is firm enough for another incision and a sure pain relief.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in circumcision which is done by surgeons, it's done digitally, as carpenters do, the incision at the tip of the male member isn't secure, as it forcibly enters the vessel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation like in circumcision, a strong iron band can corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and cuts aren't made in such a manner that it needs circumcision, I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The circumcision that is done on foreskins and the male's band, its excellence, I've discovered through experience, where the foreskins have a proportionate incision, so that the sharpness above is like the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand it has two sharps proportions, cutting according to a comparison in one time; and this makes compression of the male's band into a figure containing the foreskin from all parts, at which there is no error throughout.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first way of the operation is that you must have the child stand up significantly if it's one of those I understand to be small, so you don't do anything but hold the male in its foreskin just there, and let that inside on another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that happy in all that manner which is within your capability of receiving its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have that person stand between your own servants ready prepared, and don't let him see a hundred; hide the foreskins in your hand or leave them on your chest, so the child doesn't see those nor any other of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the male's penis and blow into the foreskin, pulling it in until you expose the tip of the penis, and then proceed to correct that which is added there for impotence.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then place the marked location on the male's base twice, and place a small piece of the second band below that, and position your hand at the spot of the band with good retention, and cut between two bands.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the foreskin slightly and pull out the tip of the penis; and then let the bleeding flow slowly and gradually, which is better; pause with powder above and on top of the powder, place a cloth soaked in goat's oil cooked with fresh hot water on it; leave that there overnight; and treat that with treatment until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the foreskins during circumcision is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the first few cuts be uncut edges and the others be cut, so that no hair remains from the root of the clitoris, and let the length of both cuts be as long as the length of two handbreadths equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in circumcision is if you forcibly remove the whole intrinsic foreskin or part of it, you should make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore cover that from your hand to your penis before the foreskin's retraction, and cut that according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it at your penis, then cut that from the one and cut that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if it has been three days, and left that swollen from the penis's retraction, then you should let that in until it softens the retraction cyst, clean that with ease, and cut that according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard against the tip of the penis, which will not be for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat that with the powder that we have recommended in the section on powders for healing diseases.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has been cut from the foreskin beyond measure, and follows along the lines above, that doesn't bother him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with what we have said until it heals.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 78.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by pressure due to stones or clotting blood, or from placing something inside or a suture, similar to what we have discussed regarding treatment methods in the division section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there's a retention problem for the patient being caused by pain which already exists in the bladder's neck, then it's necessary that the patient lie on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then have that person lie on their back instead and stretch their belly from the point just above their back, and the patient tightens their legs as much as they possibly can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So then the neck of the bladder is strengthened and the pain in the back parts goes away, because the urine is completely cleared.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, then forcefully apply the cause to the patient, so you should give him an extraction from him using a tool that is called a syringe of which this is the form: It's made of silver and very fine copper alloy, just like a needle from a syringe, with slight length in similarity to a handspan and half, to which there is a thin wire at the tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of withdrawing urine through him is that you bend the needle and fasten it at the end with wool or thread for good grip; and insert the ends of the needle into the place where you left off from the syringe, then cut any unnecessary cause of the thread, but forcefully enter it into the syringe. Then press down the syringe towards the bottom and against the belly area.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie over the table, and cleanse the bladder of him and anoint his anus with oil, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe into the opening in a convenient way that reaches the anus; and then fold the anus above the belly-button area; and then push the syringe inside; and then push it inside until it reaches the bladder, and then move the anus so that it comes into contact with the empty cause; and do not follow this order exactly, but rather do what is correct according to its curvature.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the needle gradually with the thread little by little, for urine soaks the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract that and do with urine therapy, use the syringe, don't stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder and patient find relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter V.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with chloride and with similar instruments which are compatible with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there occurs an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or if there is congestion within it, or if it is constricted by pressure, and you want to distill water and medicines inside that area, then it should be done with a tool called a chloride applicator. This is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And if the end of it is flat, then it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three parts: two from one side, just like times (which likely refers to 'twice' or 'two times').
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it's a concave place, where this is placed inside, and as much as you fill that space up to how much you've filled, add on more, within which when any cause is pulled out of the humidity, it is also pulled off, and when it's expelled from there, it is also pulled off. And when it's expelling long (that might refer to a duration or length), then it behaves like a chloride applicator where naphtha is poured in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So if you want to avoid moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the chloride applicator into the moisture, and pull off what has been filled up above that area; for when the moisture is pulled out from the cavity of the chloride applicator.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the chloride applicator into the anus according to what we recommended in the syringe; and then pull out the moisture as you pull it off; for as soon as that moisture reaches the bladder, the patient is affected by it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of a subtle enema through which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or tin, where its tip is similar to a small feather, and let there be a tube inside that.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder into motion, and pause in that with the moisture you want to irrigate in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong thread tied around the needle, and heat up that moisture over the flame.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the enema in the anus.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand over the bladder with the moisture inside, stretching downward until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you do not have access to a bladder, then take a piece of pork and make it into that circle; and puncture the entire roundness of it; and then insert a strong needle in all those parts when turned; and add the circle similarly as it would be added with fat, because you place inside whatever moisture you want from the fluidity, oil, and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you place that in the tool and do that similarly as you did with the bladder, having your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	Regarding the extraction of pain.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of pain and its treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between pain caused by stones in the gallbladder and pain caused in the bladder, along with their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the field on which I operate and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the field produced in the bladder properly is that which is formed within the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am explaining that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that the field produced in the larger bladder mostly goes to children; and as for its signs, it is like water in its transparency when urine comes out of the bladder, and it appears there as sand. And the patient rubs their penis, and boils and pustules form, and they are then discharged; and on that way through the anus come feces made from those things.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to heal children within that period of time they have reached fourteen years old; and healing is difficult in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In the young ones, it may be because of what is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And from that for which the field is larger and healing is easier; if it's small, it goes against that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So how do we achieve the healing of that, we start with the beginning of that which modifies the patient through crucifying them until they remove all the opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prevents the field from developing you have to investigate whether there's any obstruction preventing its formation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then make the patient lie down on their feet and get them to squat until they release the field into the bladder, or let it jump out from any other place, or through various boils.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that cauterizer between your own hands ready, and let the patient's hands do their things as they should, so that the bladder can be fully made to decline towards the parts of their body.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then remove that whole field and everything associated with it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the field in the space, then right away cover the area above it with a section.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot touch it all with your finger, then apply oil to your left hand's index finger, if the patient is an infant or a young one, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And remove the field as it stands with your finger inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that small thing gradually into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your finger, and force that thing out from its parts outside; note the section where you have done this.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And tell the attendant to press on the bladder with their hand; and tell another attendant with their right hand to extend their legs upwards from their parts above, and with their other hand remove the tie which is left by the legs in the place where you have made that section.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a large spoon inside, as this is its shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide that thing between the anus and the legs, not in the middle place, before the left thigh; and let the section be on that field and your finger is in the anus, and made as a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and inside stretched according to how much I remove from the field, but no more than possible, for when our finger is in the anus, you must allow this section, which should follow the field and be removed with difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some part of the field which has an angle and edges, because its passage becomes difficult due to this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that part which is like a lion with horns, and it is round, and it makes its passage easier.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it's that one with an angle and edges, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it's not like that, then cover it with your invention or strengthen over it, the tip of which is like a file where you strengthen on the field and don't leave from it; or insert this delicate instrument with curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot over it, then enlarge the tool a little, and if you feel pain in your hand, cut on that with hot vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the field is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder and insert it gently on it; and then push a small thing close to that. And similarly do this if there are several boils.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it's a large field, then ignorance is that you insert this with large sections, which happens to the patient in one of two causes: or it remains or it evaporates due to continuous urine distillation, so that the place is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And administer expulsion from it once it's been removed, or invent in the crack of it with scissors through which you extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	And once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with extracts of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in used oil and water rubbed together, so that the scab may be released.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then make the patient lie down on their back, and don't remove the bandage for at least one day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And once it has been removed, wash the area with water and oil, and then heal it using finnish balsam and balsam of diabolicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If an abscess occurs in the wound, it is painful and corrosive, resembling when the body's fluid is frozen within the bladder and becomes urine-prohibiting (this is known as causing the body to eliminate this fluid through urine). Then intervene with your method in the wound and remove that fluid. If so, the bladder causes the bladder to deteriorate and decay due to it.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And when you wash the wound with hot water and salt, against all kinds, with this that agrees for your treatment within so it may heal.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover during all parts of the entire healing process, that you apply to both thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the lump is small and is located in the middle of the penis, and urine flow is prohibited there, then treat that with what I recommend before you reach the section; and in this cure you will find an indication of where to stop; and here I have described how it looks like:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	it has a triangular end, sharp, located at the tip.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take care, making sure not to let the lump return to the bladder when you remove it from the penis.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the needle into the penis, making sure to facilitate the process so that the needle reaches the lump.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the needle with your hand in that small lump, and you make the opening on one side so that the other side can penetrate immediately; soon urine is liberated.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is hard in the lump from the side opposite the penis, when that is squashed and drained by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not appropriate for any reason preventing that procedure, then leave the lump alone and another needle on top of it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then place above the lump in that penis between two threads.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the string and change the frozen body, which is done in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to leave the needle with the lump, only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other string above but when this is untied, the needle nears the exit of the lump, the thread returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this is necessary when you have the needle above, that you lift the thread from above or you should fulfill your job and heal the wound like we said.
Capitol .lxi.	Section 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On extracting a lump from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Lump in women is rare.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see a lump in any of those, then it's difficult to treat her, and it's prohibited by various methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman should not lean too far forward with her hips.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you won't find a woman who knows how to describe if she has been with a man or if it's from a woman having had marital relations.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you won't find a woman who knows this technique, especially the operation with her hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section about lumps in women is far from the lump's location, so you have difficulty with a circular cut, and there's fear in that area.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If necessity compels you to do this, then cover that you take an experienced woman who is available.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking that, then come to an experienced and subtle one, or present a woman who is knowledgeable about women's affairs, or a woman who has part of this skill herself.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So make that presentation, and command her to do everything you tell her, from the inquiry about the lump to the beginning; which causes is that she look if the woman has hips, then cover that she puts her own thing in the anus of her and wants the lump.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if she finds that one, keep her with her own thing, and then command her to insert into that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	And if it's not hips, then command the matron to insert her own thing into the patient's mouth and inquire about the lump, because place her left hand over the bladder, and squeeze that with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	And if she finds that, then cover that gradually reduces the patient from the opening of the bladder to her hips so that with each movement reaches the edge of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert into that position at the edge of the mouth you should reach the edge of the thigh for any part is where she stops and center the lump in that part, so that her word isn't disturbed by the lump keep it with her.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert her finger into that section, and if she feels the lump, then adjust in section according to the amount she knows that the lump will fall from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of lumps are spots: those of which there is a little and are large, rough, long and round, and have horns.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And then know how many types she has for this so you can indicate about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you want to drain pus, adjust it in the location of the puncture and keep it there for an hour until the pus is removed, then proceed with your operation once the wound has been cleaned out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare with yourself the tools you mentioned in the removal of pus in men, so that you may be helped by those during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to drain pus, and you know that the expulsion of pus is from the artery that is incised, then you dust powder over the area and strengthen it with powder and tightness. Do not continue this; leave the wound as it is, do not forcefully remove this, for it could cause death in the patient due to too much bleeding.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And once the inflammation of the pus subsides after some days, and the area heals, then you resume your operation while ensuring that the wound is cleaned out.
Capitol lxii.	Capitol sixty-two.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Section on inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Inguinal hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white muscle, which contains the testicles and is referred to as the scrotum. It is named the scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases it's within the proper skin which your body naturally forms during the passage of urine, once it gets cut when there's already another urine; and it is the part of the genital between the white scrotum which we've mentioned, and it isn't this but rather a fold.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the creation of this hernia is due to overstrain on the genital organs, causing this substance to accumulate there. Sometimes it occurs due to blows struck to the genital area.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various shades of color; its color either becomes yellowing or reddening, or reddish, or turns black and fatty, or is watery white, and this is what is more common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is in this case: if it's within the scrotum which we've mentioned, then the pus appears to extend somewhat along its length like a urinary figure, and you can see the testicles, for the moisture encompasses them from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is within the proper skin, then the pus appears at the passage of urine and that's why one assumes there's another urine.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the part of the genital organs and the white scrotum, then you'll notice the swelling.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then you inspect the color of the pus in the swelling from inside, through the incision where its shape is made; and according to how it stands in the trace of the incision, judge what's inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And then when we come to the treatment of this matter, you instruct that if it's possible, perform lithotomy on the patient and increase his urine production, and let his body be full.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then have him lie on his back for some minutes or so, and place your clean cloths under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left part of him, and instruct that your assistant follow to his right side. He should extend his hand between two sides at the genital organs and at the division of the belly button.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a fold on the side and divide the part of the genital organs through the middle from the left to almost the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And do this section according to the correct method, making equal distance from the line that should be at the level of the scrotum skin, until it reaches the white scrotum.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, observe and take care of this so you do not go too deep; your scraping on the part that you scrape should appear hanging towards the urine more and minutely inspect your scraping according to how much you can.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the scrotum full of water with an expanded hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of this section with scissors and extend the scrotum towards these parts above. Do not touch the area that includes the testicles, but cut the scrotum in such a manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it all or in pieces, especially its delicate underside. If you do not inspect the incision of this carefully, it is not ensured that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	And if urine begins to flow outside of its scrotum during your operation, once you have completed the section of the scrotum, return inside and properly adjust the two lips of the genital organ's scrotal area with stitches. Then treat this as you would any other wound until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the urine is corrupted by other illnesses, then inspect that you cut the veins which are under the scrotal suspension, remove the urine, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is accumulated in two parts at times, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part as you did with the other equally; and if it's visible to you that it's an operation, then do this.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean off the pus, and between each section use wool submerged in oil or in rubbed oil; then put aside another piece of wool which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, spread this over two testicles and the belly button; then place over it dry cloths and powder, and lay these over them according to this shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And have two cloths prepared and fill them with boiled wool according to this manner; then place the extremities on which pressure is applied either with a cloth or with moistened wool, add them to the structure in the crotch of pants, one extremity takes from behind into the other, the second goes at the opening of the trouser leg, two extremities over two thighs and two others over two knees, all tension should be adjusted within the pants' waistband.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of section by iron; and you take a fine surgical cautery and make an incision at that point on the genital area, and it is lit according to what we have recommended inside where white bile containing water is discovered, then you take the cautery following this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek writing.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce that bile, and it is lit inside so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then stretch that bile with hooks, scrape with hooks, and scrape with the lit fine cautery; then cut it as far as is possible inside where you can remove all of it; and be careful not to let the flame touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and further from the source of infection than an operation on the section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it displeases you that there is an abscess at the time of section or during the cautery, or if there is a discharge from infection, then determine how this condition affects you regarding which treatment is suitable for them, apply that cure to them as stated.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is anxious and does not anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture according to what I have recommended; and this is when you should be informed about it, based on what we have discussed regarding the meanings, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then determine to have the patient lie on an elevated bed, then pierce the abscess at the lowest part of it on the side, and continue the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the opening wide so that all the water can flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand on the wet area and smooth it, so that all the remaining water can drain away.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat that area until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If the condition is against water drainage in that moment you puncture it: and this is not done unless white bile within the wound causes a problem and prevents water from exiting, then determine to place an instrument inside the wound with which water is extracted from the hydrocele, its shape being provided; or adjust over the wound's surface a small piece.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that water returns, and is gradually drained approximately over three or around those months; and as it accumulates, then puncture according to that method, so the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On section about fatty hernias and their treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And know that during section on this hernia, there is concern about infection in the major areas; because I see the cessation of it and being saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in that and the specifics of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, state that abscesses occur in the areas of the body where the genitals are located and this is done due to these causes: or from sudden overabundance of pus, which infiltrates into the genitals, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, it does not appear with its pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a thin one is an uninfected abscess, whose color is dark, and does not have pulsation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is done due to blockage of the arteries, and by swelling of those already noticeable in memory, or by swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	And this is due to swelling of the arteries, known when pressing that area with your fingers; and don't determine that you touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And this is done due to swelling of the veins, not spreading from any cause you should only apply pressure with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that for this type an operation can be performed on the other carnal parts; and you make the incision of the genital area, then stretch your hand to the upper parts, extract it from white bile, release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and cut off the pus sac as you remove it from all parts of your hand.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if your hand is already within those solid areas, then determine to remove the hand and make incisions.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause within the bile sac, or between what is between the layers, then determine to release all that adhesion and make an incision there through a round cut.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is a native growth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then determine to make an incision of all that is from it and remove your hand as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with oiled and scented wool; and then treat that like any other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Concerning the treatment of hernias involving vitals.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess enclosed by some kind of sheath resembling a bud, affecting the ability to perform exercises and walking on the thigh.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in treating this type of thigh ailment, it is due to the anticipation of what comes before it that requires recall or reflection.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, they say 'operation' in the context of doing the first one.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that when you are performing surgery on the thigh, place your hand over an elevated pillow; then remove the scrotal suspensor to the parts below; and position the tendon of the thighs under your thumbs where they press against the pubis; and have those other ministers assist you, extending them in vigorous extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then make an incision longitudinally through the area across where the veins are exposed within them.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then carefully remove from all parts whatever we have described in the extraction of stones which are found in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those locations a needle with a double bevel, insert that at the first of the areas where the abscess occurs on the thigh, and do so again further along them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then make incisions in the middle of them longitudinally according to the length of the body, and extract that which has accumulated from the cold and corrupt fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with healing for the other wounds in which you wish to be cured by letting the veins that you have left one or two thighs flow, which is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If an abscess occurs throughout the thighs, then say that the testicles should be removed or that the testicles due to this are cut off from the veins, so that they lack all nutrition by the incision of the veins, and they become hard, or that it is without youth in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol .lxv. (This seems to be a numbering marker for a chapter or section, possibly related to surgical procedures or medical knowledge.)
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia involves a section that develops under the stomach when extending on the belly from the parts of the intestines in the abdomen, so pushing those contents into some of the cavities.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is from the stomach or from an abdominal cavity; it happens in these two species due to various causes: from impact, or from a jump, or from shouting, or from lifting something heavy, or from being pressed.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this (when due to the expansion of the stomach), is that it occurs gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly; it's an abscess evenly spread within the peritoneum where the stomach compresses the cavity.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this (when due to the section of the stomach), is that it causes intense sudden pain at the start; and it's an abscess varying in appearance near the abdominal cavity. And this is by displacement of the cavity, and the body of him is ahead of the stomach's parts further away.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some areas are outside the cavity with the membrane, and this condition is called intestinal hernia by backsliding.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some are made due to wind, and some go into the cavity opening, here it gets stuck, this is a great discomfort in the thigh, and some become ill wind and more so when they are pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this type of thigh ailment, it requires caution, so you should avoid strenuous activity in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of performing surgery on that is to command the patient to return the cavity to their hand at its place inside its cavity if it returns to its normal position, and then envelop them under their chest between your hands, and raise their knees.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the cord, which ties the scrotal tendon above them, and make an incision all along the length of the scrotal tendon; and then place two edges of the cut in the middle according to what you need to open the section at those points.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the opening matches the amount that is possible from that, so that the section is open.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove that part of the stomach which is left from the scrotal tendon, within which a white hard stomach should be exposed from each side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you intervene with what your hand finds in that place which cuts the testicle, that's between the white stomach, which is left of the sperm duct, and behind the stomach, according to its side, and free from that adhesion that is at the opening part behind the sperm.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then bring your hand to the scrotal tendon on the sides forward, and do so by extending the white stomach along your left hand, and lift the sperm upwards towards the stomach at the section's side; and command the assistant to lift it up while you dissolve the adhesion behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And check with your thumbs that there is no cause for the cavity being wrapped in the hard white stomach.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any reason in him/her, then you must pull that towards the belly from there.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick double bevel, insert it at the end of the stomach, which is below the scrotal tendon, the place where the section occurs; and then make four incisions at their ends inside that area, and then bend some of them in a manner resembling an X; and insert that part of the stomach from which we have said that the scrotal tendon is left with a firmness on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the limbs and tightly bind them within such that some of the veins that supply those cannot allow any cause for pus to spread, thus preventing an abscess from occurring here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another ligament further along the path than the first ligament, three fingers away from the patient's navel; and bind these two ligaments smoothly around the penis which leaves you the chain of the testicles in the size of a finger, and cut all remaining parts according to roundness, and hold the thread steady while sewing.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the part left of the chain of the testicles through a section where blood and health flow as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and apply the ligament as we have recommended (and some white threads are cauterized, which is what we mentioned nearby when discussing the place of blood flow, where those threads come into play) and bind the ligament so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the healing of the patient is delayed, then use warm water to bathe them, and place something over it as we have mentioned when discussing how it should fall.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And in the meantime, treat the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	Concerning ventral hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it has not been seen that any of them was heated during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones would say that it is done in this way as we have recommended for the hernia that is in the middle; which means you tie the veins close to the section about that facilitates the patient; and dry off around the center area of the abscess, in such a way that opens this place, where the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Concerning the disturbance that occurs in the kidneys.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some threads may break in the kidneys as we have said, and you should leave the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not let any cause of the intestines reach the genitals; and if they do, it's little; and return to this always.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time goes on with this, a fissure is made in the penis so that the intestine falls into the penis; and this happens due to the expansion of the penis which is in the kidneys as we have said, the cause being that the penis is stretched, and the area becomes soft and inflamed causing it, you leave.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of the patient is with a cautery as what was followed by the story of the patient.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some threads are healed with iron according to this method: and what the patient is lying on their two buttocks on your own cushion, and then dry off the area of the rupture of the abscesses you place it at the section by the width according to the size of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white penis that is below the chain so that it becomes exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take hold of the thread and place it over the most prominent part of the penis, and press that to the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then pinch the two most prominent places on the tip of the penis, and adjust one of those to the other with suturing.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the tip of the thread, and do not cut all the way through the penis, nor pull the hand too far or any other cause as I know to be relevant in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and as you cut into the limbs, clean that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; which means that the penis contracts and does not adjust the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, which is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Concerning the softening of the chain of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Some threads of the chain of the testicles in some men become soft due to this and because the muscles that are within that area also become soft; and you need to take care of it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary for the one who is taking care of this treatment to have the patient lie on their two sides, and lift all the chain that becomes soft over the natural chain; and also adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, pinch in the beginning the excess of the softened chain with three or four stitches and make a tight suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the stitches; and then treat with the treatment of other wounds until it is healed, and let the limbs fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Concerning castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for some reason I remember this to you in this book; and it's not necessary to remember this otherwise than with two methods, of which one is so that when a doctor is questioned about that thing, they know how to treat the affected person; and the other method is that we need castration from time to time for the young ones of other animals due to those reasons, just as in hunting, dogs, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it's said that castration can be done in two ways: either through gelding or through incision to section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the one where it is done through gelding, the way of the operation is that we make them cut the beast in cold water so that the genitals of the animal soften and swell, hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not show any touch marks.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration done through incision and severance, you must have the beast and press on the base of the testicles with your right hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then attach the suspensoriums, and cut on each one where two testicles would be located.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut out all the pus that you will have excised.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum, but rather the subtle scrotum which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one done through gelding, for it does not leave any cause from the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it has healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is where they develop into a space in the base of the testicles, in that which appears between two testicles, resembling half a female with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some discharges from that occur urine located in the base of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In the females there is a special case: it's that the female part above the vulva is like two testicles of a man, somewhat smaller in size at first, like the prepuce of a male and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is for three kinds: of two for men and one kind for females.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it's that you must cut into those tightened muscles so that the discharge of that comes out, and then proceed to treat those wounds with the cure of other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men which has urine, if it's located in the base of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation needed for that.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On leucorrhea and the inflammation of tissues caused by female conditions.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Severe leucorrhea is adjusted to natural causes that are increased and need attention; some discharges become more significant in certain females to the extent that they spread like in men, penetrating during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you must have the excess of leucorrhea with your hand or on a finger and cut it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not conclude with cutting, especially in the opening of the vagina, to prevent discharge of pus.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that wound with the treatment until it heals.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The vaginal mucosa is the tissue that does not emerge in the mother's belly until it fills that space, and severe leucorrhea appears at those parts like a penis (thus they initially called this condition "caudal dysuria"); then you must cut it like how we cut leucorrhea, treating it until it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of arthritic conditions.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the female part isn't punctured or it's only slightly inflamed.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to dysuria that has preceded it, and this one is done or by poorly adjusted vaginal tissue or by a subtle scrotum or thickening.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it can occur in the opening of the mother, or at her sides, or in excess pus inside her, or in lower pus inside her. Strictly prohibit coitus and pregnancy prevention, and heavily prohibit menstruation as well.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The diagnosis of that is made through examination by the midwife, if the prolapse is evident, then it's severe. But if not evident, then you must feel around with your fingers or inside her.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the prolapse is due to a subtle scrotum, and it's near the two lips, then you must hold it and force it back.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place your hands on the two lips, and then press with your thumbs on both breasts.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the female is on her back, her thighs spread apart, and you then spread both lips forcibly until that subtle scrotum is ruptured and the prolapse opens.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and let him rest at home for a day so that the cut area does not get infected.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the scrotum is thick and dense, then you must cut that with a knife or with a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if the prolapse is due to fatty tissue, then you should hold that up with a finger, and cut that area.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you should use the medicines that help stop pus discharge such as saffron, dragon's blood, and garlic, adjusting them with broth of chicken.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead catheter to prevent the wound from being lightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that for several days and administer hot baths to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let this be cured with the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some veins occur during the main birth of other muscles, and then cut them as indicated in this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it's due to a boil, for the boil which is in the main area, don't mix iron with anything else.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemroids, tailaches, and red boils that occur in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an ailment of the openings of varicose veins where blood flows continuously from them; and old hemorrhoids, when they occur, manifest themselves in this way.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already explained in the division of those and their symptoms, and also to say about which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So I say that during pregnancy, when hemorrhoids and such do not appear with the feeling, then there is no need for treatment with iron in those.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those are the ones that are on the openings of pregnancy where you feel a sensation; these are the ones that receive treatment.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And let you place the woman in mustard baths and then spread butter on her thighs or on hard linen, or under rough cloth, cut those with the razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And when you have cut those, apply powders over them from one of the medicinal powders in the form of a bite, like ginger and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And let you rub her feet for an hour, then place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding of the blood persists, then have her drink a decoction of suman and dried mangoes, pomegranates and similar.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And let you take flour of sugar-cane, mix it with honey and wine agreeably, make a poultice from this over her back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is eliminated, drink it; otherwise, apply to two bandages, and on her nipples do incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and immerse it in the juice of castor, or in the juice of arnica, or in the juice of gaultheria with wine cooked, and apply it to the place; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Let any cut that's of hard appearance be made in such a way that you cut it according to what I said about tail treatment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of ovarian cyst during pregnancy.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses that occur during pregnancy, such as those caused by inflammation, stone-piercing abscess, ulcers, abdominal abscess, worm infestation, fistula from hemroid, hernias, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already explained these ailments, their types, and their symptoms, as well as their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And let me explain that I will speak about the treatment of abscesses when they occur during pregnancy and which are related to healing; if you want to know how the operation is done in this way with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and pus, fever, and sometimes it turns red; and if you feel a sensation over it, then note this for perforation of it, and treat it with what helps in maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then let you cut the woman on a board that has two boards; lie her back on this and adjust her feet to the remaining part of the stomach, and spread her thighs apart, place her hands behind her knees, and tie them with bandages in accordance with what is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And let the midwife follow with the left hand and administer the tool through which an opening is made in pregnancy, its shape will come about in those causes that we will explain.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this tool, fix it in the middle of the belly of the woman, and what goes through the instrument into pregnancy should not exceed the belly and harm her.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the belly of pregnancy, then let you put powders on the texture of the belly of pregnancy so that it prevents all instruments from entering the belly of pregnancy.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And let you put the fluid that runs in the tool of pregnancy above it and have her hold the tool while she moves this fluid inside until the opening of pregnancy is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when you see the excitation, and it is touched with the hand and is warm and moist, then let you stop this with his head in the wet sand.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the healing is evacuated, let you place a wet bandage in olive rubbed or olive oil in which there is some heat; place the heel in this area of pregnancy.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And let you leave the belly exposed and over the belly, wool cloth wet in water where mandrakes have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And after this, let her be cured about two days with ointment which agrees with what is necessary until she is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some treatments involve washing the whole body and applying a poultice to the infected area that is saturated with water and honey, then adding water in which herbs or powdered garlic have boiled, and subsequently returning it to the application.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the infection is deep inside the inflamed area, then it's advised not to treat this case with iron, instead use the treatment we have discussed in the previous section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol. seventy-five.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how to best nurse the newborns when they are sick according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife understands in the eating process the figure of normal childbirth through signs from her, and when you have a female to give birth and she urges for air, as if overcome by the exertion, and she breathes heavily according to where the pain is localized on her body, and accelerates the expulsion of the baby, then you know that this birth is according to natural figure, and it is her breathing above her head, and the second one at that point suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you observe those signs, then it's important that the belly of the person is compressed by itself so that the baby comes out slightly lighter when lying on its head, and present her with the second one, and it's necessary to remove those excesses for good improvement.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another case for this unnatural and impractical part, when the baby is expelled onto its feet and the body of the person is positioned in front of their head and feet, and one hand or at the foot of that person... Or when the head of the person is expelled and their hand or it's at the belly, and they are lightly turned onto their back, resembling figures that are impractical.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary that the midwife be knowledgeable and discerning in all these matters, and avoid errors and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing you every figure of those cases, and what is the cause in those cases for it to be significant and its state to correspond with it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the birth is expelled on its head through natural strength, and it's vigorous with the woman and causes difficulty in her part, weakening her virtue, then she should perform this maneuver, or what the women have at their disposal, evaporating the moisture of their body with fennel oil and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife should intervene between her navel and small opening with the second one, or dry that area with alcohol in which there is moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And presses on the belly of the woman so that the fetus expels itself.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it doesn't expel itself, then it's necessary that the woman be treated with fennel water and fennel jelly for the cure.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, and guide her breathing, that she is compressed and make her sneeze with the conditions; and keep her mouth and nose open for an hour, so that the fetus can emerge quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both ends of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then it's important that you reduce those gently to facilitate the process gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you don't follow the instructions, then have the woman lie on her side and lift her feet up, and then place the stool under the ground; and make sure the woman is held so she doesn't fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the ends are not turned and birth doesn't occur, then you should insert those and remove the fetus's head or make contact with its body using a cloth and extract it equally; so that it can emerge.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	During expulsion of the baby through her hips.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus comes out through her hips, it's necessary that you push those in, and then gradually turn the fetus slightly, try to equalize that situation, and take one of its feet and spread those hips gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When it's expelled into the thighs, then you command her to expel herself, make her sneeze under conditions; if God wills it, it should be able to emerge quickly.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it doesn't emerge quickly with what we've recommended, then you return the fetus bit by bit so that you place it according to its natural figure; at this point it will be able to come out more gently.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it's forbidden to do everything we've recommended, then take fennel and dissolved gum, crush them well in the mortar for good pounding, then mix with the moisture of the woman, the bottom pus of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make her sneeze in hot water so that she gets under her armpits.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts of your body are softened, then have her undergo a sub-fumigation with mint and place her under it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after an hour of sub-fumigation, then make her lie on a stool, and have her sneeze and open her mouth wide, lift her up, press gently on the lowest part of her belly, so that the fetus can emerge quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Expulsion of the fetus through its hips and buttocks.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus emerges in this manner, it's necessary to guide her hips gradually; and make sure the woman is lying on her back, her feet are pointing downwards, those should be placed under her thighs, and her hips should align properly.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then gently press on the patient's abdomen little by little, and gradually extract that which is causing their foot pain inside the ear area where it has been prepared for removal.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not expelled, then take the patient's legs and push them with strong movements, and gradually press that which is above the lower ribs little by little while the fetus ascends to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert his hands and gradually guide the fetus little by little, commanding the woman to push while the fetus is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The fetus should be suspended laterally with one of her hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It is to be skillfully performed in reducing the hand of the patient. If you cannot reduce that hand, then raise the woman and let it go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it won't go down, then place her on her side, and vigorously squeeze her thighs, and administer remedies that I have recommended for purges.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth has come about, then have her lie on her side, and study over the reduction of the hand, and guide the fetus according to its natural figure, make her sneeze, and command her to push herself while it is being expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Position the fetus on or over the collarbone, spread out her hands and the surface of her body as much as possible relative to her mother's.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Make sure the midwife holds onto the hand of the fetus and gradually turn that little one bit by bit, making it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And as soon as they are equalized, then pause on the chest of the one that we have recommended using oil and for purges.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to gently push bit by bit, and when you have done this, have the patient lie on one side and command that she be inclined towards the right hip, and then command her to push herself; make her sneeze under these conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus after being prepared exits onto the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the horror from the mother occurs according to this manner, take note of it, and then you must immerse the second finger into your nail while it is being evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the one, then you must immerse that of the belly button, so that it is not retained and stays put.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus towards the lower parts inside while pausing it according to what you observe, and command the woman to push herself for a few times, and let it be expelled gently if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The expulsion of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twin births occur naturally, and some may require three or four tries, but this is strange and difficult to achieve; most of these are caused by natural factors, not by will.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they be multiples, a second one, and are separated by ciphers, distinguishing them inside the navel tissue for each of these. Some births occur naturally bit by bit, and others require forceful efforts like we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some are difficult among them, you must assist in their birth and proceed with the figures we have mentioned for unnatural cases. Then you treat those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what makes it easy and subtlety, and with delay, and skillfully according to every figure as she has been prepared by her craft leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of what forms within the womb from embryos and abortions.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some veins are formed in the mother once, twice, three times, four times, five times, six times, seven times, and more than ten times. You should verify that one female who aborts does not get pregnant again, and another one has had all these formations, which is caused by measuring the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this conforms to what is in the science of midwifery that it allows for that little resemblance to be applied to such things, and then pauses when it observes that there is progress.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus in the way we have instructed in the division of medicine and it is not expelled naturally, if you are inclined to use surgery with your hands, then consider whether the woman is of good health and does not suffer from any accidents that might bring about her downfall.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And then consider that the woman is laid on her side over her back, and that her head is tilted forward and her thighs are elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And let the minister hold that of both parts or tie her in bed so that her body does not extend towards the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of the one for her with oil and with purgative juice, as well as with fennel and seeds from it.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then smear the midwife's hand with those oils and purgatives, and insert her hand for facilitation in the one, and place her hand where the nails will rest on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And places convenient in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend over its head, and then you place the nails on the cheeks of it, or on its neck, or on its mouth, or on the palate, or leave the beard, or on the cleft of it, or near the back areas, or leave the lower ribs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the discomfort is in his feet, then near the heel, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And have the hand on the right side of him, and hold the curve of his body in that place which is between the last two fingers of my left hand, and insert the hand for ease, keeping the foot in one of those places we've mentioned, as it goes down to the root cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place and keep it in the position of his other foot, or heel if necessary, so that there is an even pull, and not just extension according to its straightness.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And may it be applied throughout the entire part, so that the pain of him is relieved as much as when in teeth the eradication of them is done.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And apply it where the extension is softened; and if any part of him is being held, then consider that the midwife applies some of her fingers with oil and insert those skillfully, then move around in that which is being held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the fetus is outside, then let the hands be placed near the spot which is pus filled; and do this while all the fetus is being removed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is deep behind the other one, and it's not possible to reduce that by restraining him, then consider having a cloth cover over that; and remove that while all is being removed, and cut into that or at the junction of the hand or at the side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this similarly for the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the fetus's head is large, or it gets restricted in the passage, or if there is excess water at the head, then consider inserting between the fingers, prick into the head, and drain the water, or look for that with an instrument which is called "the scalpel", its shape will resemble the shapes of other tools near this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do this if the fetus has a large head by nature: and consider cutting that with string, or take that with scalpel as we have said; and then use forceps to extract those bones.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is stuck and restricted at the sternum, then consider making a cut in order that the moisture which is in the feet be dissolved.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it's not complicated, nor causing pain, then consider cutting the head immediately as is suitable to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the breech or the water is stuck or in him, then consider piercing that where the moisture flows within him.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the fetus is above his feet, then consider that the pull of him is slight and the direction of him to the mouth of the mother is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it's restricted at the belly and feet, then consider to remove that with cloth which you will have covered over your hand, and cut the belly and feet in order that what flows within them be allowed to go.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs remain and turn the head, then consider that the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then insert your hand into the vagina, and surround that with the head, and pull it towards her hands, and throw him towards the mother's mouth, and prepare to insert another hand or two of them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is restricted by pus that occurs in one of them, then consider not to be lifted over him; before this consider administering exhalation from wet fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages; and continue the patient with waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on his side, then if possible it should be cut: and the water that we have said about in the living fetus should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut with forceps, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And see that you do not leave any cause within the second.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, consider administering what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by pus from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then consider it in warm waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her belly with a dead fetus, and near that there was another pregnancy, and the fetus itself was dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A long time ago an abscess occurred in his umbilical area; and inflates so that the fetus swells up, and began to move.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called for his treatment, and treated him for a long time, and the wound is not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I used several strong pulling plasters on him, and extracted one bone from him, and after some days, extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, because there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I considered that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	And then I washed the wound, extracted bones of the dead fetus from him, and the woman was in such a position that she could move around for a long time, correcting his movement by half a foot.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider it strange, rather that in this there is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor does with his hands when administering treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the forms of the tools that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vomiting from which the belly is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strength from which the ropes are equalized, to which equality two vomits in both ends of each fetus.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Yet let this vomit be more subtle than twisting, and let it be made either of rope or of wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each rod be two inches and the edge of either side be one inch, and the length of each is a hand and half; and in the middle of two rods there are two joints of those wood rods which are already made, of which the length is almost a hand and a little less, and the width of each is about two inches or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be inserted in the opening of the mother's belly so that they open when you rotate the two prescribed vomits.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that one, more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of ropes or wood according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Yet at the extremity of it should be two additions just like that, and the length of those additions is about a hand, and the width of each is two inches.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And as you wish to open the belly with those, then cut the skin above it while she is lying on her back with her feet hanging down, opening that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the tool in such a way as you do with scissors equally according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's belly within which she measures to do what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vomiting as the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of pushing from which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of assistance, in which the large head is turned:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps with teeth at the extremity, just like that, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like that, which has teeth like reed teeth in which it is inserted and turned.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of assistance for a little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a spoon with one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a spoon with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps in which the teeth close on it, in which the head of the fetus is turned:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a spatula with two ends, from which the head is severed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two spatulas laid out:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are practiced, and when more varieties of that are multiplied and prepared you should use the experts, the lighter to their operation and more autonomous regarding their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments already if you need them yourself, for the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second is retained you must give birth, then open so that you command to the mother to keep her urine, and make that sneeze with the condition, and strengthen your hand on her mouth and her nostrils, and if by this it goes out naturally, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a sponge and perforate in the cover one hole and pause on that herbs to open the mother's mouth, like camomile and rough, nettle, chamomile, powdered gum Arabic, cinnamon sticks, and thyme.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water on the sponge, and pause that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a pipette of cassava in the mother's mouth, and let that be within which the vapor escapes to the cavity of the belly.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that sneeze as we have said, and the second comes out spontaneously at speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May this treatment continue and if it is not successful, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in saffron oil or in rose water extract, and then insert that into her womb and let the second come out with that, and when you have found it, take it little by little May it stick in the mother's uterus, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the second, remove that little by little according to rectitude so that the mother does not fall from the strong urge.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before it is made easier on both sides of her breasts and left side.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust in the amount of urge which she will obey and avoid sticking to it.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medicinal use of the sponge herb.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if it is not out of all the causes we have recommended, then watch that you do not tire in repetition of abstraction, but rather open so that what escapes from her reaches to the thigh of the woman, and then anoint and apply tetrapharmaceuticals; which will make it dissolve over several days and come out naturally.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And when you put it on, it raises her bad odor to the head and stomach, and this drives away the mother; and then open so that they are administered sub-vapor treatments and suitable for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	The translations are as follows:
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Forming an instrument through which the female is subjected to subfumigation, you should retain the menstrual flow and the secondary menstruation:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	The translation is:
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The translation is:
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	The translation is:
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	The translation is:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Translation:
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Translation:
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Translation:
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	Translation:
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	Translation:
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Translation:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Translation:
E es una fistula o motas.	Translation:
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	Translation:
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Translation:
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Translation:
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	Translation:
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	Translation:
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	Translation:
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	Translation:
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Translation:
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	Translation:
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	Translation:
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Translation:
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	Translation:
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	Translation:
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some might say that certain people are healthy in certain ways.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the treatment by which youth is expected in them, it is that you apply a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that flame into the fistula inside where it reaches around the inner organs; and then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those tissues adjusted to the fistulose have already adhered.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat those areas wrapped in bandages with hot oil until all those tissues that have adhered heal. And similarly, treat the affected tissue with medicines for healing and strengthening it; if it is healed, it's good; otherwise, there is no further cure in most cases within a certain time period.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the infection goes inside and does not penetrate your mentioned area which is in the anus, and between that and the one that is slowly filled with meat or scabs, and you let the fistula drain where its surface meets the rectum. Then dry the rectum from the beginning of the fistula, then see if it dries on the outside, and if so inside the fistula, where the drying reaches the spot where the extremity of the infection drains out, and then the infection is relieved and heals.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then purify those fistulous tissues which resemble the feathers of an eagle, and do not cause any damage to them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And when there's a discharge of pus between you and your operation whenever those tissues are inside your body, then make sure it is done and remove any small amount of pus with the slightest instrument possible: apply fire or an acute medicine cautery to this; among these fire cauterizations, they have two benefits: it adheres to the tissues that are adhered together, and it cuts off the pus by drying out its moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat those areas with hot oil or thick paste until the affected area gets warm. And later on, similarly treat the wound with hard meat medicine that heals and strengthens it.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And when dealing with medicines involving constriction and discharge; once this process is restored, it's already healed and there won't be any need for another treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula already penetrates into the anal canal and is elongated from its surface on the body, then insert your mentioned tool in the anus and inquire about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And then if the infection has hardened or is slowly filling with meat or tissue and it's close to penetration, then it's not an operation in them but rather according to hope and faith.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That condition requires administering one of the three methods: either to cauterize that, as we've said; or to dry that off so you can reach its cavity and thus it will be possible for you to insert a few things and allow the healing process to continue within the body; do not directly heat any drying areas in case they contain internal organs and cause harm to them, act according to your desire and intent on where this injury was inflicted by force; then dry that area off as we said, making it strong so that it becomes healthy. Or elongate that gradually and drain that pus that dries off inside close to the anus, as we've said, either on the infection or with another sharp tool, then thoroughly purify those fistulous tissues which are in this drying section; try to restore all of the wound area through heating, if pus above the opening is not consolidated, and continues to leak from the opened fistula near the anus, a small amount of pus will drip down from there.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some instances when the fistula ends in this way: when you insert the needle into the fistula, and it is at the edge of the anus near the body's surface and around the anus margin, then it takes on the appearance of a perforated needle end, which is similar to sewing thread preparation in this manner:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert the needle into that skin covered by several layers or around those areas; then insert the needle into the skin within the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if it penetrates into the edge of the anus near inside, then you pull out that thread as far as your mentioned tool can go until you insert your mentioned tool in the anus; and cut off the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthen each one, let this process happen for one or two days, and when more of the thread is being dragged into the flesh, strengthen it inside where those tissues are being dragged between the two ends of the thread and they fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound so that it becomes consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the opening of the fistula is not penetrable, then make it penetrate in any way that you have prepared, but rather towards inside where it's not accessible to you so as not to harm the organs; and then proceed with healing it from within.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of applying a spike to what's split by the fistula: its curvature is mostly sharp on one side and not-so-sharp on the other, so as not to harm unnecessarily that which isn't necessary, just like how it sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing of hemorrhoids where pus runs in the opening of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids come in two ways: either they resemble coal inside the anus or they look like butter of figs when it comes out.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large ones. Pus from inside the body comes out at a time and is uniform in quality, it's impurities, and it comes out of the anus, and also at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Those are the ones that occur in the buttocks according to the few wet months, from which sweat is discharged or a little of blood mixes with water continuously, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The treatment for that which is inside the stomach is to command the patient to lie down and to press internally until the stomach boils and the ulcers appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	So you touch them and suspend them with your fingers or whatever you have near your finger tips, and then introduce those needles into their depths.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the needles are not near those due to their wetness and softening of those parts, then take those in dry cloths or in a cloth or in a wool blanket, and remove them with your fingers, then introduce those and grind over them some herbal powders near the incision; or cauterize those according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And after that, treat those with another cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not respond to expulsion, then cauterize the patient with a cautery in which there is a small bite, and wash them with that water which is in the stomach and which facilitates expulsion slightly when the patient is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the ulcers are outside the buttocks, then the cause of them is slight, so you should take those with your finger tips or those with needles, introduce those, and then treat those with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And when you have made the incision, follow this method in administering stitches: take a coated needle and insert it into the wound, then remove the ulcers from above the parts affected, and make that penetrate through the needle at the depth of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the cut edges of the thread around the part laterally; and strengthen the ulcer with firm stretching, and then burn out the needle and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one out, for so that the excess blood will flow from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or in wadding over the buttocks; then place that on top of the stomach and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And let that be in place until it heals; and when it's finished, treat those with ointment or another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Moths that occur due to the excision of a wound or through constriction by nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and do not benefit in that medicine, then you should open those with the point of thorns or with your finger tips until they become moistened and let the pus from those cover them, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat those until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And you should drain those with vigorous pus until the first ones are infected and become irritated; then treat those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that to ulcerate is the key, and it's not something else but turns red resembling a piece of knuckle, and it happens throughout the body and especially in those parts beneath the feet and hands, and because of those you should feel the pulse.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And you should feel that which is in the circulation of the knuckle, and hold it with tweezers or needles, and remove it from its depth; and then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize it according to what is described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	True warts are small, rough, round ulcers on the surface of the body, and moles that occur through nature in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And to treat it you should extend or introduce that, or strengthen it with a needle or with wool until it heals.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize this, according to what we said, with fire or with quick medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And once they have been eradicated both forwards and backwards using the tool I have directed.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A ant bite is a small, soft or ulcerated large lump on the surface of the body that moves in pregnancy; and when you find that it is red as if bitten by an ant, it happens around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And to treat it, you should take a needle of goose feather or of vulture's feather, make it firm, and place that on the ant so that it contains the circle of its parts; then move your hand with the needle until you introduce what is in the circulation of the ant, and place that at the base of the flesh, and remove the ant from its depth.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with an iron needle or as follows:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the needle be drawn in with subtlety, silently (meaning not perforated), enveloped by what appears on top as if it were removed and the movement of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the ant according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization for anthills.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the form of the instruments that are used to give cauterizations.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some remedies are made from silver or copper or melted earthenware or hammered metal; and some remedies are prepared with small and large tools depending on those used for administration. The ones used in the treatment of young children's illnesses should be small, and for those who have swollen or painful testicles, the remedies for these should also be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few remedies:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the catheter above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this method; and in relation to where the bag is tied, it should be done similarly sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the pus inside, which penetrates the anus, should be soft (i.e., non-obstructive) like a lion; and with subtlety, behind it, there should be two cuts on one side of the buttocks, and on the other side, one cut. The width of the cut should be according to the thickness of the rays and for thicker ones, make them slightly larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which medicines for the bladder of beast or sheep skin are placed, and its size should be as large as a hand.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should have holes made in the same way as they are turned; and if the space between the cuts, its thickness according to that.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert a strong piece of raw lard into each cut, about the thickness of ten lards or so; and adjust it to that; when placing the bag in him, stretch it at the tip of the catheter between two marks firmly, and insert the catheter into each cut: The quality of inserting it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and remember not to make too long a hole nor too short.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then let the patient lie on his back, raise their legs and place a person or a pillow under them; and smear the end of the cautery with oil, or with hen's egg white, or with fenugreek or basil paste; and gently insert this into the anus. Then the doctor takes the bag, presses out that substance in two doses each time with vigor until it completely evacuates from the intestine; and then remove the catheter and lift their legs onto the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to excrete, use as much as you can; and if sleeping under this for an entire night, it is better later in adolescence.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you insert the catheter in the belly ailments and the patient's discomfort lasts, then you will repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a subtle and lion-like catheter, similar to those used for children's treatments.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Regarding the treatment of infections.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already spoken about the treatment of infections in relation to freedom, and I also prescribe these treatments with me and medicines according to their effectiveness.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So, I say that the infections are diverse according to how they occur and according to the location where the infections attack.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which wounds occur and cause infections can be due to exposure to air, or injury of skin or bone, or impact with a spear, or a stick, or an arrow, or due to these kinds of wound-causing factors.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Infections that occur in the body parts are like scalp infection, or neck, or foot, or belly, or groin infections and so on for other body parts.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some infections based on that reasoning and principle for other infections.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will start with simple scalp infections, where the memory of compound treatments will come in the introduction of the next chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And I say that when an infection occurs on the head and there is no fracture, then consider: if it's due to exposure or a similar cause, and if it has been drained sufficiently only, resulting in a large scalp infection with concerns about potentially forming an abscess underneath, then you should perform cephalic puncture and bloodletting immediately; do not delay this. Then drain the wound according to the amount of its effectiveness if no other contraindication for bloodletting exists, especially if the blood coming out of the infection is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the bloodletting procedure is contrary to the part of the infection; and take care not to overeat or consume too much alcohol, or heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	And if you have avoided any causes of discomfort, then reduce the food intake and do not get close to meat or alcohol.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And while resting on the infection, if an abscess forms, apply it to hot oil-soaked wool or in wine which has been made stoptopic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are sure of an abscess forming, then rest on the infection, if it is recent at their wound and air has not changed that powder which I recommend slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then rest on applying ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the infection is large or due to injuries and inflammations, and if their lips are not adjustable with pins, then adjust those using suture according to how I will explain about the suturing of these.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the sickness has already been discovered within and without the body, and it is not a retention of any substance but rather a small suspension, then you need to intervene with that. Proceed by cutting there and immediately treat the affected area with medicines and restore the flesh at the site of the wound. Then instruct the patient to eat vegetables that are good for health: cabbage and beets, resembling their natural form within them until they become part of it.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find corruption in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then you need to cut out all of this pus and drain it, and immediately treat this area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these wounds an artery or vein where the flow of blood could occur is found, and it cannot be removed with medicines, then you need to investigate around the artery. If you find that part of it is not cut, then you need to cut there on top of a flap, or seal it; and if necessity compels you to do what we have advised does not connect as desired, then you cauterize until the blood is congealed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor. Apply this powder over those areas, let it harden before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take one part of oil from beeswax, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of ash; mix all together thoroughly and sift it, then apply that mixture over the wound, bind it well with good compression until it sticks to that area when pressure is applied, and it will coagulate with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then cover that with dust and let it rest, do not remove it until you see that it is hardened; when the medicine has fully absorbed into it, then it will be healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes if you alone use this cautery, when you do not have beeswax and dragon's blood in stock.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And perform this surgical operation on large wounds when you leave it to rest on those and strengthen them, and on recent wounds in their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then it is not advisable to apply this powder in its usual position. Instead, treat those with what we have advised, and when you place some more digestible ointments on those, or when you place powders made from flour of ashes into water and honey until they turn to paste; then treat those with another cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If an accident occurs and there is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you need to extract that with force.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell you the treatment for skull fractures as they are poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	And about wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, just as for a simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	And if the nerves or artery of the neck has been cut, then when it is nerves, it should not be treated with medicine that causes strong constriction, such as garlic and sayings that are similar to their noses to the nerves, which constrict those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not cover the wound with anything that might hinder it completely, for the substance of nerves is fluid and the continuation of this extends to the brain, which is the source of all parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with minor medicines like washing in lukewarm water, or some emollient dissolved in either crushed or uncrushed oil, and thyme when washed in lukewarm water, and the rest of the poultices according to this method, and ointments moisturized.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you should perform suturing or tighten the lips of it, and proceed to treat that with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if there is depth in the wound or it occurs at the lower part of the paste, then puncture that in the deepest area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if there is already an incision in the wound and blood flow has been obtained, then separate or dry that part, or seal it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you have already incised the tendons of the leg or all parts, and veins in the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with suturing over the artery channel and do not touch that; make sure to straighten it and reduce it back to its natural shape, and reinforce it with decent tension, let it rest for a few days; treat it with ointments containing constriction and stimulation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	And if the wound has already penetrated into the bone, then you need to puncture it. And if there are pieces of bone in this, extract all those that you can from them; and what is not suitable for you, let it rest until the wound heals, separate it, and make its separation from it better.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then apply the recommended powder over that area.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if there is a fistula in the wound, then treat that with what was mentioned previously in its main part.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding neck wounds or injuries that occur between the shoulders, when it occurs at the armpit or on the chest wall or in the back or on the shoulder blade.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it's a spear strike or a cudgel blow, and you measure its depth from the patient, then assess whether there is windiness at the wound when the sufferer breathes; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in the patient and the wound is recent at their arm, then you pause with the first hour of powdered herbs, and don't allow that for fear that it might retain the disease within the depths of the wound and return to the body causing harm to the patient. Instead, pause with a healing ointment, and remove those two times over the course of the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at your disposal, then you pause on the wound's opening to let it drain what comes from the moisture; and make the patient lie over the wound so that it can drain whatever is in their condition.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If it has been three days or more since the wound occurred and no seizure, cardiac shock nor constriction occurs in the patient, and if you consider other good dispositions for him, then know that the wound is saved; and then treat it with rest and among other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the patient is justified, and it has been opened for all times, then know that a fistula has already been formed; therefore treat that according to its head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a spade or a cudgel, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat that with what precedes suture, if it's large, or with powder, if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	And if there has already been a fracture in the bone, and your patient is cut into pieces, then you press the wound and remove those pieces if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	And if they aren't separated, then wait until the wound heals, as their extraction becomes easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds and incidents in other limbs, juvenile healing is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Regarding abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or mixed.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the large ones, some openings are made of the intestines or nerves of the intestines, so that their introduction and suturing be more vigorous and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And for the small disruptions, it is made difficult by another method, and I know that their return to their place is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introduction of them back to their location immediately, as it expands causing difficulty in making the inner material.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is mixed, where neither the return of the intestines is difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but these two sutures are common and suitable for sutures in other types of wounds in the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two suture methods are specific for communicating with other types of wounds, but they are particularly specific to suturing the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you, without reservation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and causes some obstruction of the intestines through it, making its reduction difficult, then this situation occurs in one of these two ways: either by the diminution of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestines are swollen due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is the case, take care to immerse it in this way that you submerge a sponge with wet tea water alone, or that you take it in hot water squeezing, and garlic, and onion, and crush them within the intestines until the swelling resolves.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some openings do this with vinegar where there is astringency, and it's better than water alone in the resolution of swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you have resolved the swelling, then you moisten the intestines with water in which there is tea and bay leaves, for this makes the inner content of them ease to some extent.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if the inner content of it is justified by this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small instrument in which are incised strings.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that it is not dry, and there should be no necessity for drying or deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, if its form is this:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one part of its shape is sharp, and the other part is not acute. Its extremity is subtle, but not as subtle as a needle's point before it becomes blunt for only a little bit.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and comes out of the intestines, take care that its return is according to its natural form, in its proper place. If it's possible over this, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is large and occurs in the lower part of the abdomen, take care that you make the patient lie on their back, and place several other limbs above their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then pause the head and feet further than the sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration at all times so that the part with the wound is easier than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus cover that you administer this in large sores and in medium-sized sores.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small sores, apply this to what is your preparation, and have that person administer it between your fingers. The one who does this should hold the whole disruption with their hand and adjust the lips of the wound, and then proceed to uncover from there to there if any suture material causes another adjustment nearby.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: when you take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the width of the wound; and then smooth out from the tip of the ring finger's disruption, hold tight with one hand, or another that does not put the thread into both ends of the braid, on both ends of the thumb where the thread is left inside. And you make it penetrate through that opening; and now you have added both ends of the thread and both ends of the thumb, then do four rounds.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then hold the thread double at the loop of the needle, and sometimes in both parts simultaneously, add both lips and wound with a reasonable addition; and smooth out the thickness of the finger and insert another needle there, and tie that off as well as you did with the first needle. And continue doing this if necessary among the needles until you complete the whole tension of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be medium in stiffness and subtle quality, because subtler needles easily penetrate flesh; and thicker ones are difficult to insert into the thread, so that they should be medium in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And don't let the needle be stuck at both ends of the thread close together, because then flesh would not be cut easily and the wound would reopen in front of its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And don't extend stitches unnecessarily so that the wound doesn't prevent its own healing process.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so they don't penetrate too deep into the patient's thigh; place powder from all parts over the stitches, which have the needle ends; leave them there until you know that the wound has already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these methods of stitching with needles in the usual way are appropriate for small wounds, which until now have used one needle or two or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture method is common: and that you administer during suturing the four ends, of the thread and both ends of the index finger, in one go, with a needle where the thread is wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have the needle penetrate these four ends, return the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the thread retracts from the pus part towards the wound, so that the suture follows the suture of cloth where the cloths are held tightly.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the thickness of the finger's length.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is what I know how to do.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture, I healed the wound that happened to a man in his belly, which was pierced by a stone, and it was the largest rupture of a palm-sized wound. It was situated among two palms from my finger's location around two palms from the middle point; and thus, after the intestine had been reduced for twenty-four hours since the hernia had emerged through the wound,
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed within fifteen days or so, and cured that one and it's well; then live by the advice of these remedies for many months, and is discussed in his instructions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors judged that it was not healed; and by miracle only, since I did not cure that with ointment, which was in a place where neither oil nor any medicine was absorbed, merely covered for about two rounds of days daily, and washed regularly with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will tell you two types of suture that are mine according to the narrative of Paulus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And this is how you begin with the suture of the thread, and introduce the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then, when the needle penetrates into the thread and places tacks according to rightness and length throughout the whole body, leaves the end of the index finger where you introduced the needle; and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part in the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then make another round in that middle end of the index finger from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the index finger which is at this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration of your needle into which you made this penetration in the index finger at the end of the part, where it is within his finger, so that all of this penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this middle side, push that in at the end which is of the index finger on this other side, and remove the thread needle which penetrated, then return that into that thread and push the end of the index finger which is at this side of his finger; and pull that out from the thread which comes from his part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once more and another time, and do this with another instance between them where you cook all that is different according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this surgical method is that you sew with a needle in the skin where you stitch the skins; now, you cook once the part from the end of the thread, and you let that second stitch until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second type of surgical stitch that you will use is called Gualia; this method involves considering and following the body's instructions for it. So you sew according to the similarity in their parts with what some surgeons do, meaning they add all necessary components to their respective parts as per natural order; they connect one end of another part with the other end of that part, and this is done based on my advice to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And when you hold the needle at your fingertips of the outer part, make it penetrate inside that part from that side, and leave two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside at the two ends of the stitch.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And rotate those loops again, making each part penetrate inside the other two parts from outside at two ends of the stitch other than those on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of sewing is better than the common light sewing, and it is a type of stitching that requires prior knowledge.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is called Gualia in Latin.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And as they might say, the belly's stitching is corrected with two needles. So you insert one thread into each of these at their ends, and begin by inserting the needle from which you are to sew, making it penetrate inside that other side according to the sewing method where I have equalized the bodies.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when a disruption is in the middle of the belly, then sewing it becomes more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicine for gout is the judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And the cause is that when you catch gout early in its stage before air changes it and you reduce the swelling, then you stitch and heal it properly. Then place on it red flesh powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already changed the gout, then place on it some ointments which you have at your disposal so that they make hard wax and harden the threads, and solidify; and treat it like this as treatment for other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you don't have the medicines at your disposal, then place on it immediately, since it starts to ooze pus and old blood. Switch those two stitches each day, as you were taught, until it is healed; when you do not need any other treatment for simple plagues in such positions.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the gout will spread to the main limbs, then cover a lion's wool in oil of high quality or in fried oil, and place this on the circuits of those areas between the joints and let these be there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in his swellings, which stitches are used here, then apply this with a stinging black vinegar on the wound, especially if the pus is inside the swelling and causes penetration through the cavity of the thing.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that that which comes from a large swelling is light pus for healing, while that which comes from finer swellings is different.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the swelling which is called "gegunu" does not receive treatment for gout that affects it entirely; this is due to the large number of veins in it and its large size, as well as the fineness of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you are dealing with from the gout is the skin, and you catch it early, reduce it according to your method until you equalize the swellings.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it has passed in him and become red or black, then strengthen that with thread over the area that is degraded in him, so that blood flows from the damage, since there are veins and arteries in the skin.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then you insert what is another inside that ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the other part left open in his skin, so that it is relieved by your effort to fix the fabric and expulsion of pus from the gout.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder for plagues when they occur in the swelling.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the swelling and is small, then it may be cured in some people. As I saw him who was struck in his belly with a lance and had gout on the right side of the stomach, and the gout was old and caused fistula, and there was no strength in his movement and flatulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursued the treatment of him even though it was not satisfied in his healing, but I continued to refine him until the place is healed and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I noticed the place already consolidated, advised about the misfortune that happened to him in his belly; and did not attribute any part of this bad accident and destroyed in his many positions by eating and drinking, then washed himself and exercised at his will.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And now some experienced ones would say that when there's an infection in the intestine, and it's small, then they dig to reach it as follows: you take pieces from large roots; next adjust both sides of the wound and place a piece from those with open mouth above the two sides of the wound. Then, when it presses on these and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, which adheres and doesn't dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another piece close to the first one, and don't stop doing this with pieces right after each other according to the quantity of the whole wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And return that and everything related to the wound; break off those excess roots inside the infected area so that the intestine becomes healthy; and ensure it doesn't harm the patient during this procedure.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine can be likened to a subtle material made from animal intestines, particularly because it swells like thread. And you would take hold of the tip of these threads of intestines, cut them neatly, and place their ends in this material, encasing it. Then insert that thread into needles and substances among that piece of intestine, then reduce it during dissection.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with pieces is nothing but according to the path of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the infection is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines where direct intervention is impossible, then there is no cure for it entirely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every infection and abscess when it inflames and grows old, and results in a ulcer, which doesn't consolidate and bleeds constantly for a long time and can't be cut off, then anywhere this occurs throughout the body is generally called a fistula and we call that ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And as for fistula according to truth, it's a fibrous, hard lump, white in color which doesn't cause pain and against which the body reacts similarly like reacting against an injury; therefore that's how some refer to certain cases of inflammation, namely injury.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in such wet conditions, it bleeds out; and a slight increase in humidity leads to bleeding off within some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture causes swelling, it's minimal, it's thick, and it's subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, as I said about infections, that every ulcer which isn't healing and isn't exposed on bare skin, is due to none other than one of these causes: among them, one is due to a lack of blood circulation in the body; or due to the body's malice; or where between it and the skin there's hard flesh preventing the natural formation of tissue; or where there's leg disorder; or because that ulcer itself contains pus and whatever substance it interacts with is of bad quality; or because medicine isn't conducive to its treatment; or when corruption occurs in the region, it's contagion; or due to the property of the region such as in Saragossa where digestion of illnesses becomes difficult, and abscess healing takes a long time due to nature; or where there's bone inside it, or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Having shown all those causes, their signs and the treatment with medicine is explained in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus, I will teach you how to heal a fistula which is treated through surgery by the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that result from major veins, arteries, nerves, spinal cord, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the thoracic vertebrae, or where joints are formed similar to hand and chest; and among them, there are fistulas that are close proximity to the main limb parts and resemble each other.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus, among these types of fistulas that are treated this way, they result from illnesses with difficult healing and not receiving treatment or care, making it a laborious task due to lack of knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there's some fistulas whose depth doesn't reach the areas mentioned previously, and you hope for its healing and are confident in it, wanting to know more about it, then attempt with iron or a needle. If the fistula is straight, then you inquire about it by touching it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead object, where lead in its body sinks and curves according to the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if there's no movement or horror in the fistula, it is not within your ability to indicate anything about it through touch.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	And thus cleanse the opening with your fingers, where the moisture used to cleanse that should flow through other openings and exit them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire meticulously, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if there's bone or nerves here, and whether the fistula is distant or close to the surface. If it's a fistula with multiple openings, this is over your whole strength, during your questioning of the patient, by pressing your hand on that area, understanding the meanings and causes associated with abscesses.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And once you have assessed all those causes at the true station, then proceed with treatment according to confidence: it is that you consider this now whether it's a superficial fistula close by or in deeper locations, far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the areas I've mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry out the fistula as was described in the narrative about him, and remove whatever is in that filtration and from rotten flesh, and what has grown within the opening of the flesh or in parts and their likenesses, treat it internally until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long-distance depth and is straight, then hollow out what you incised in the preon until it becomes possible for you, and then change that from all its rotten flesh; and prepare hot-wrapped composites and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this by making some incisions in that way so that the acute medicine corrodes everything that is rotten within the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it has not been healed by this method, then you will burn that according to what we have advised.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you have to certify this, then inquire about it and dry that according to what we have advised, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and blackness in them, then remove that within which the corruption is completely present; and treat that with what nourishes their flesh until it becomes healthy.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healthy and bleeds like before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; hence uncover again on them from the second time onwards and make a detailed examination of this, along with its proper preparation, until your treatment results in stronger fortification, and then treat it accordingly.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, then that's good; and otherwise, know that this corruption is at the deep remoteness of the body, which has not been able to heal, hence for you there is nothing left but to leave this.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone becomes rotten and is small, or if it's possible for you to pull that out, then you will pull it with delicate forceps suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if they are spongy bones, then make the extraction of all those carefully, and do not leave any cause against your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If it encounters any contradiction due to dampness and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then if those ligaments or tissues are present here, cut them out and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If it is not your preparation to have the bones of your time, then place your hand over that which should heal this wound, and leave it within where this is around those bones and tissues, and guard that wound from being consolidated, and ensure that the section you incised in your operation remains restrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you are afraid, place your hand on the submerged wrist in a heated oil or on an Egyptian ointment, or any of those ointments that give off steam, so when these ligaments relax and the bones become separated from their flesh and the dissection is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone like the bone of a limb or thigh or anything similar to that, and what is rotten in them is just their surface, then remove this only from behind until you expose that blackness and corruption, and then proceed to treat this wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is rotten in them is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then this becomes necessary to close that and everything you have incised inside the area where the corruption is found, and then treat it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you to do this, in order that you place that example and assistant on your operation when working near someone's thigh.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Consider this situation for someone young around thirty years old, who suffers from pain in their thigh. The underlying cause is found within the body material where the disease has reached the thigh, and it's a matter of abscess, especially a large one, not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend that time during the error of the doctors until the abscess bursts, and drain off the moving materials, and the treatment is adjusted while a change occurs into a fistula. And do so on the pus-filled openings where all had inflammation and bodily moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then there was a period of over two years of doctors' treatments, and I didn't rely on those but rather in the art when they called me.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the change in that and the fluids flowing from those openings through large veins; and already the body of that person was entirely stiff, and the color of it was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a stick into one of those openings and reached the stick to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found that they could reach them from all parts of the body.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I felt it and incised over one of those openings where I found part of the bone, and removed that rotten thing, and it was earthy and rotten and decayed; and already had become rotten a part of the body where it penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I wrapped what was discovered to me and prepared for the revealed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I would say that it's not within the bone but rather that corruption which hardens and constricts, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And continue with the long-term restoration of the wound using consolidating medicine, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And I would re-examine and uncover again inside the bone after the first discovery, and continuously find corruption within the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I would harden what appears to be that corruption, and I proceeded to perform the treatment and restoration for him, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered another wound in him and did not stop digging into the bone gradually particularly and completed his restoration, but it was not restored until after he dug around a palm's breadth from it. And I extracted his spinal marrow, and afterwards restored that with medicines, and it was slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of him and his section but due to his bile disposition and the lack of his endurance and fear of death which happened to him all the time due to excess evacuation syncope,
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard bodily parts; good disposition is made inside his body and virtue returns to him; and he changes into his dispositions and does not do anything contrary to him during walking or injury in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in the location of the body already drilled, then follow this method: you should take hold firmly that bone at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it downwards. And place a piece of thicker cloth fiber over the flesh where the bone was left exposed. Extend its end so that you pull the flesh towards the left and right parts previously exposed, and uncover the flesh on the location that you want to drill in order for the drill not to cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stake or table at that part of the body correctly, so when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the drill so that it does not cut into the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And you should make the drill to start over that corrupted spot little by little, so if it's inside the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its manifestation at feeling, force him to open another wound.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, right before one part continues to the other, and the corruption is at its middle or in a part of him, then you uncover the flesh from all parts completely; and you place a stake there, and then drill that part where the corruption is inside where continuity exists of the drilling from the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the drill according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, drill that corrupted joint, and drill the bone where continuity exists from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not at its reason but in between them.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the elbow of the hand or chest, it's quite difficult; however you should inquire how the corruption appears to you, and cut that open, then show that according to every disposition which is possible to you, and for each side correct it as needed, so that it doesn't contradict you arteries or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the drills and the drills to drill these bones depend on the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and their subtlety and largeness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so you should prepare for every species of operation tool suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation means to you about the type of tool which you need; when among you is great study and long knowledge of the methods of this art, and experience from methods of diseases, as then already you have for yourself taken this that's convenient for him of tools to every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I shall be to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of tools which you will have placed among them, as simply as in which you proceed with your prohibition which you will experiment on the others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of drill:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of other drill:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another drill:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of large another drill:
Forma de ray:	Shape of ream (drill):
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this drill should be according to the shape of the star key's head, and its points should be as per the shape of the points on the astelfege.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it's not necessary that for those, when they are corrupted, there should be friction at the heads of the joints, or else it has a large and wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger scissors for the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller scissors:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the diagonal scissors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another drill properly made: it should have an arch above the fluid, and the sharpness of the iron blade, and the member of the boy's stabbing point is to be made downward.
Forma de lu:	Shape of its (referring to something or someone previously unspecified):
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of scissors in which has been hollowed out:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle pair of scissors:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-end scissors:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small shave somewhat resembles a tooth:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of canine teeth is such that they cut through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutters:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting instrument; this resembles a blade, and the end of it is like a saw, exhibiting in muscle locations along the course of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of a needle which corresponds to that which penetrates through bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, similar to the hammers that we have mentioned for razors, cutters, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For cutting at the extremities and for unlocking bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are pressed either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with curative medicine and the cure does not occur, or sometimes the corruption must be removed from that body part due to no cause affecting it, then strike a tool into that body part until it reaches the diseased area, so that the patient can die of sickness or harm caused by this much greater misfortune of the body.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which you apply it, is that the limb becomes black inside where it has been burned or if you place the darkness inside until that heat goes into that limb and spreads throughout its body; then take your tool to cut into that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if there is a cause for the corruption due to the impact of certain poisonous causes such as from a sea scorpion or from a viper or from a snakebite and similar cases.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is at the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you reach the hand, then you cut that from the base of the thumb, and do not allow the corruption to spread inside where it can affect the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you extend that, then cut the arm into the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes elsewhere around the elbow and there is another cause in that area, then death comes to the patient; administering another cause for that is a lot of virtue in treatment.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do it for the chest when corruption extends throughout the chest, then you cut that into one of the ribs.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it spreads in the bottom of the chest, then you cut the whole chest.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it extends into the diaphragm, then you cut the cavity into the joint of the diaphragm.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already penetrated through the diaphragm, then it is not an operation but rather release, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting the limb or tightening it is that you strengthen the ligament at the part where you want to cut, and place another ligament over the area. Extend your assistant's hand with one ligament on each side of the parts left. Extend your assistant's other hand across its sides. You separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that it opens all the way; then proceed to cut or tighten it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And strike a tool so that all sides are covered by the ligament for itself making sure it doesn't touch the area, and that the patient receives the injury adjusted and without an abscess.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if during your work you encounter blood from the wound, then you cauterize the area moderately or place some strengthening powders on it; and afterwards return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And tie the injured limb with ligaments at a suitable length, and treat that until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that when something happens to a man in his hand, this incident is placed on it which I and you have advised, which happens to him turning black in his hand as though it had been assembled for burning with fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurs in his finger spreading throughout the whole hand.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself to apply pus because when the treatment progresses towards the body with its intensity causing pain and distress, he cuts that hand into the joint, and the hand heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time this incident of corruption occurs in the finger of his hand as described.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and so I am supposed to correct this excess on what is left over in his hand with the medicines, near the body's transformation; and the excess does not recur but begins to spread into another finger starting from the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asks me to cut the hand of his, and I do not want to do that fearing the recurrence of this excess, rather I fear your judgment on cutting the hand which is already dead, where the life's virtue was in restraint.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he left me, he returned to his homeland and came back to me that man prepared himself and cut his whole hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not told this story merely for amusement about such illness, but rather so that it may serve as a guide in dealing with cases like this, and so that its significance may be understood according to which it is to be performed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the care of sinuses and the quality of enemas along with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some muscular limbs and the space of the abscess extends inside collecting pus, then it is broken and perforated, and the pus escapes from him, leaving the place void as if it was a vessel. The membrane that was covering it remains like a fine cloth underneath, without reaching deep corruption, not penetrating into bones or nerves or joints; it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends inside causing corruption in some part of the body, then it is called a fistula and it is not located elsewhere.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to incise that membrane all around as it has moved, especially if it's fine and formed like a cloth, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the membrane will stick and the corruption hasn't resulted from posterior consequences, then when pus has appeared in the membrane, then your treatment is with a suppository.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider it as a sinus; if the opening is large and emits an odor when pressed, then suppository that with Egyptian medicine containing oil, wine, and vinegar in equal parts, mixed together and placed in a container, which are then heated over the fire until the medicine boils and spreads like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; suppository that into the sinus; strengthen its opening; let the medicine remain in it for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you extract that at the expense; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus has subsided.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And for some cases, it is suppository with ash water when this medicine isn't at your disposal; you must take the ash of juniper and mix it in water; then heat that mixture and suppository it into the area until you are convinced that the sinus has been treated.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then suppository it with water and honey which is mixed with vinegar, then suppository it with wine and honey that has been mixed. The properties of honey make it cleanse and soothe, while wine makes it stick to the sinus, especially when there is excess viscosity and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And as you do this for some cases and convince yourself that the sinus has subsided, then suppository it with a substance that causes growth in the area.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take defibrinators and dissolve that in clarified oil and wine with astringent properties; or suppository it with certain medicines and other ointments which have the characteristics I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrowed in such a way that the catheter of the suppository does not fit, then you gradually widen it with iron, and pause during this process covered in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the opening is large, then you stitch up the lips of it with suture and allow from the quantity that fits inside with a suppository to be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of the area from which the bone protrudes is elevated to the upper parts, then dry it in that place where pus is located so that the bone can go inside without you. When the bone is constrained within the depth of the sinus, the tissue will grow there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it's not possible to dry the sinus within the vicinity of the bone due to pus, then you perforate where you prepare the limb for surgery, so that the bone protrudes slightly as per your capability and without leaving any obstruction for the bone.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take restorative medicines that are placed over the sinus so that they extend as much as you want beyond the skin.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the skin should be of such large quantity that it allows for communication with all parts of the sinus; then incise with scissoring instruments in the center of the sinus opening, a slit wider than necessary so that there is enough space for the sinus opening. Then spread on another piece of skin with lion ointment according to the width of the slit and let it dry far from the sinus opening allowing for the bone's movement without disturbing the large skin significantly; doing this only once or twice a week.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And that which is over the opening of the sinus, you strengthen continuously to ensure it fits properly with the bone.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what is coming out from your body in relation to the bone is much or little, whether it is digestible or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And in this way, you should also consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain or not, and whether it is inside an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment continues in this manner, you observe that the substance exuding over the sinus opening sticks or begins to adhere. If it adheres, then you gently remove it or loosen it daily, and when removing the wound, replace the bandage with a new one and change the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if the sinus is far away and there's fine pus under it, don't worry about the adherence of the skin, as that indicates healing. Some people take longer for tissue regeneration in their wounds, while others see the opposite happening.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if bile rises up over several days causing indigestion, then you understand that the bile does not adhere; and if the adherence of the bile is delayed and becomes a prolonged issue, then adjust in drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are damp in their substance and in their effectiveness, they become dry as well, just like dyaphinicon grease when it has been adjusted to excess accumulation of fat.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And behind the matter which is being cured, it is that you take dyaphinicon grease and dissolve it in roasted oil, and apply it to your body, using it as needed.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And already pretending in that action, when there is no bile, take dyaphinicon grease and honey when it is rubbed inside the body causing it to thicken, use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them together with honey as they are under the fire, then apply this mixture on a cloth and strengthen this over the stomach; and apply this on the honey that you have rubbed inside making it thick, and grind this further on the cloth and strengthen this.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some healing occurs through the administration of simple herbal remedies in my long and detailed language (and this is heavenly lily) and flour from poppy seeds and centaurian, use these simples or adjust them, grind those together and sift over the honey that I have recommended; and use this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the bile is prolonged, and this treatment does not cure it, then you understand that corruption is in your body, and begins to investigate within the bones or other hard parts or joints; then you treat it with tuberculous disease, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	From the treatment of ingrown nails and cuticles, and cutting of a finger, addition of an incision.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Ingrown nails are an abscess which makes the nail cuticle of the finger or foot depart from it, and forcefully pushes the nail into other fingers. If this is prolonged and its cure is expensive, or if it becomes infected with another abscess, or if it gets corrupted, you must dig in through the nail's root, force out the corruption of the nail completely, and force out its corruption to reach the bone within which it stinks, then cut off that extremity of the finger, and the color of it is made dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that which we have said in the division and it does not confirm your cure, then consider that you should incise with iron all the excess that has gathered under the nail, and apply cautery to the wound near this area, where heat from the cautery is beneficial in this respect.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is safe and the nail is healthy, and the additions to the nail have already encompassed tissues from inside, they begin to prick them, leading this, then consider that you should place your finger gently at the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, push it further in, and incise that flesh with ease, place on top of this what remains of the flesh from the tissues burned by corrosive medicines until everything is thoroughly excised; then treat this with greases until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if corruption has already spread into the bone, then consider that you should incise the bone there and remove it, because nothing heals while there is corrupted bone in the body.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and the corruption are spreading in that finger, then consider that you should incise it at one of the joints according to its memory point, and treat this within until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	And if there is percussion or scratching on the nail, and there is intense pain in that area, then consider that you should at the beginning bleed out the patient, and treat this by removing the nail with a sharp blade across its dry surface upwards, and make sure that the drying does not reach the flesh that lies beneath the nail, which will cause intense pain to occur on the body, and is the reason for the development of excess adjusted tissue in that place; then heal that area with whatever relieves the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And this adjusted thing, which is natural in many people, forcefully makes flesh everywhere, or it forcefully resides within the bones, or it forcefully resides in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And such things are natural in the tissue of joints, or they are the nature of this body in some joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And that which is natural in some joints of the finger does not cause harm, whereas this which is natural at the joints forcefully causes trouble.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are naturally fleshy, the drying is mild; thus, you should incise this near its root with a blunt blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And of that which is natural in the tissue of joints, the cure is difficult; thus, be careful about removing it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And in that which is natural in this finger, consider that you should incise at the beginning of the flesh towards the bone, and proceed to cut with one of those saws appropriate for this, and then treat it within until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	And consolidation is what occurs between the joints of fingers due to their inherent nature or as the body ages, or through healing from wounds, or due to burns, then consider that you should dry out this consolidation within so that the fingers return to their normal shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And between their cloths of ligaments in the oil that has been roasted, so they do not consolidate lightly, or place a layer of soft lead sheet between them where consolidation occurs as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	When it happens that consolidation occurs in some of them on the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to its preparation and fit it to the figure of the body.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Regarding the description of diseases, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Diseases are varicose veins, which are thick, full of melancholic superfluities, veins that appear in knots of the body's limbs. Their main manifestation is on the chest, and especially on the chests of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, when you administer the heart's purge for black cholera, some strong discharges occur during its expulsion, and you make the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of their blood according to two methods is as follows: one way is to incise it and pull out that black pus, and the other method is to raise the vein and remove it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of him is according to this method: drain from the beginning until water runs in for a while that the large pus is resolved, it becomes liquid on the chest, then strengthen the chest under his buttocks so that it is raised about half an inch above the knees, and drain the vein at one point near the bend in his legs at the same level as when he leaves them, and drain the black blood at a location or two, or three in wide sections, then lift the black pus with your right hand from the bend under their buttocks upwards into it, and above, where you drain the quantity of pus that you want and is enough for him, which will draw out the power of the chest.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then lie there, and command him to refrain from eating any food that might generate black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full and you notice this in the chest.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them is according to this method: you who rub the chest under the chest, if in their knots in the belly, then place him in water and rub the chest with hot water until it turns red and the veins are swollen; or if he exercises vigorously by physical exertion, if a bath is not available for you, until the member is scraped.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the cord along the vein for sections in length or at the back of him, you need to pull his legs, or at the lowest part of him you need his buttocks.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the cord with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it, and you should see his appearance that times that complaint decreases to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you have raised and removed the cord, let that white thing be the cord that you have removed.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place his hands under this line so that they are raised and lie flat beneath the cord, hang that one on a nail or on iron.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section close to that section for three inches, and scrape the cord from the part above the vein until you can see it.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that and incise it at the last section you should do his buttocks, and then extract that and lift it until it is visible through the second section, and then extract that from the section which is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is most above or another of all sections, until it is completely visible; and then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not follow to extract and raise it, then insert a needle into the thick double cord and tie that one, and extract it, or insert your hand under him and move your hand in all directions until you lie flat.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And watch that it is not incised too deeply; for if it breaks, you will find it hard to raise that knot and it has spread over the chest through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have completely extracted that and it is lying flat, then place your hand on the spot of the wound with wool submerged in oil and rubbed oil, and ointment not rubbed, and cure it until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the blood flow is constricted without having much winding and is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you should cut above that at all parts of its winding, and at the sites of constriction around it, and then hang it up with scissors so that you can raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And watch that you preserve your section so that you do not incise the vein and do not trouble that one, for it will be hard for you to raise that; use your judgement in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the cut where the blood has been dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a needle or rod:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as cooked for him as for ordinary needles nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not trouble the vein; and it has great elasticity iron, if it were subtle, it would cut into the vein by its subtlety; having said this it is in his excessive thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Regarding the extraction of the femoral vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the chest on lower lands as Al-Ategi in the territory of Arabs and in the lowlands of India, which are dry and have little fertility, where neither grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And the thick one is generated in other places of the body, elsewhere in the chest.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the condition of him is from putrefaction that you see in his cord as with venom inside the body like snakes, worms, insects and parasites generating between the cord and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And a sign of the anticipation of this disease is that it occurs in the area with intense inflammation; then the area becomes swollen; and immediately afterwards, the vein begins to emerge from the site where that inflammation seems to originate, resembling a plant root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see it at the extremity, then weigh what you cover over that with a weight of lead whose weight is equal to one dragon. Within two dragons' worth, and place it there and let the lead hang suspended from its chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And for as many times as any cause makes inroads into parts outside, enclose this with lead and place it there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the condition is prolonged, then you must enter a portion of him and wrap it in red; do not enter that from which it is rooted, for if you enter that it will be contracted and penetrate into the flesh, causing inflammation, pus formation, and a bad ulcer at the site.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it is treated gently and extracted gradually, without any cause remaining in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein emerges in some people that extends the length of several palms and has already reached me, where I have experienced one up to twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is entered during its treatment, then introduce the needle into the patient's wound and pierce that along its entire length in the body, so as to evacuate all that is within the material. Then administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; afterwards treat it for the healing of pus discharges.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has opened several times and mainly when it appears at the junction of the chest or in the chest, and brings about the opening of various openings, and emerges from every opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it in this way as we have said in the division, and according to what was said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section about worms generated under the skin and it is called cow sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some countries as cow sickness because it occurs in many occasions among cows, and there is a worm present that is native between the backbone and the flesh, and it moves throughout the body up and down, and its movement can be felt from limb to limb causing the backbone to break and protrude.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is through the putrefaction of some fluids thus causing worms, snakes, and other parasites to occur in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is found through the malice of him, when it moves in the body and rises to the head, then reaches the throat, at which point it twists his bile within him, enters and destroys the throat, and this occurs repeatedly.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to treat and remove it, do not do so if not with regard to the development and manifestation of him as felt by the body, then proceed where you strengthen what is over him and what remains inside him intensely and forcefully constriction, and afterwards dry up on it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is buried in the flesh and does not escape, then you place a cautery with fire on the site where it lives, and the main fear that is feared is corruption of him as we have said, which corrupts the area thus.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if it is found to have reached the head near the throat, then press firmly over the forehead with intense constriction, and afterwards dry up on it, and extract it; and know that the patient uses bodily changes through medicines expelling bad putrid fluids, and avoid foods causing body corruption.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the section about cow sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our country, and it is pain that appears in some limbs, and afterwards spreads from limb to limb.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second one which I will report on.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to treat a sick woman in a village, and I saw her arm and found a small swelling on the funis vein of the arm. After it burst for an hour, I saw that swelling move like this as it ascended towards this one, but less forcefully than water flowing from a spring, so as if it were living silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then you feel the pain in that area and settle into the muscle, and remain like this for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And afterwards flows internally to reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And afterwards, he informed me that it was moving around in his entire body as I saw; and I was too amazed by the transformation of him and the speed from limb to limb.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my own throat according to that manner, however, I have seen several which cause pain to be transformed from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it like this in the throat as with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think it is like this only because the woman was of old age, with her dry body and visible veins, and in this case there appears that wind movement transformed by sensation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this reverse flow in those who are lively and have wet bodies with many veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat him, and the patient feels this pain, then it is not like what we said in relation to the throat, so proceed by pressing on that place gently and dry up slightly over that area where that constrained wind emerges, then cauterize the site.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not notice it among your scents, then you treat that as an internal discharge and whatever expels wind, cure those with herbal remedies and pills made from serapi and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to the species and according to their locations in the body where they find use, what makes them diverse is that some of them have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones, they can be solid; and there are also those which have three angles, and among those are the ones with tongues; and among those which are like needles.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and buttocks where they find use is according to two ways: those are limbs or principal limbs that have a concave side like the brain, heart, stomach, lungs, intestines, bladder, and kidneys; thus when it finds inside one of these limbs and shows signs of death, I would recommend acting quickly, so you should avoid extracting that arrow in those where death has already taken hold, especially if it's in the most vulnerable areas. And when you don't see any such symptoms appear and the arrow is not hidden deeply within the limb, then you extract and cure the wound from that.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And concerning the symptoms of poisoning: when it finds inside the arrow, and penetrates through the skull which is above the brain, if it happens due to excessive heat, blindness, dizziness, nausea, swelling, tongue pain, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting from anger, and if there's a loss of speech caused by a word being torn away, and if there's a presence in the wound location of a white dampness resembling dust, and saliva appearing as if it were too much liquid for the meat.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so, if you observe these symptoms, then refrain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it's already out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The symptoms of the arrow when it's near the left breast, are that it's close to the innermost part, and feels as if it's stuck in hard tissue, not causing vision loss. The movement of the arrow is similar to the motion of dust, and the condition of the wound has a black spot, and it becomes cold at the extremities, there's excessive sweating, and fainting; thus you know that death descends from all directions.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung are shortness of breath with frothy blood in the wound, and the veins close to the neck are hardened, and there's a change in the color of the body, and they start to breathe heavily and require the intake of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow is found in the muscle layer which is located under the foot, then the pain occurs near the small ribs and it causes a great intense pain along with sighing, and there's not too much fatigue of all the body muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow is found in the stomach, then there's a strong sensation of nausea with some undigested food in the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is found in the abdomen, and it's stuck there, you'll find a hole in the wound or the skin, or the intestine which has been ruptured, and there's little hope for the treatment of its extraction from the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and causes urine to leak out, it can lead to processes escaping from you in certain ways. And there's a pain over the body, so you know that this is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Treat the other limbs in this way too like the face, neck, back, shoulders and supporting parts, and the lumbar area of the spine, the ribs, waist, chest and similar body parts are treated according to major protocols when the arrow doesn't hit a vein or artery and it's not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend this to you that I've observed about these arrows, so you can understand the significance of your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is because when an arrow hits someone near the tear duct of their eye in the angle of their nose, and I extract it from there towards another part, you let their ear wax go, they will heal, and no harm occurs to their nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And when it comes to extracting another arrow from a Jew which hits them in the ear wax of their nose, let their eyelid remain as is and let it alone. The arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained except for a small tip that stuck to his stick, it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, made of iron without any ear wax.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And when dealing with a Jew, there should be no mishap in their nose.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And when it comes to extracting another arrow from a Christian which hits in the back, it is an Arab arrow, and that's the one with ear wax; then I pierced through it between two guides, it was already submerged in your back. Then I carefully removed that and the Christian healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And when it comes to extracting another arrow from someone which hit their abdomen, I thought they would die due to that; then, considering that there were XXX days since this happened and there was no change in his condition, I pierced through the arrow and operated on him, he healed, and there was no harm caused to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in which an arrow hit him near his back, the wound had consolidated over him, and since then it was approximately seven days ago, he moved the arrow to the angle of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I see a woman who has an arrow in her abdomen, and the wound is hardened inside her, and it does not change in its position during pregnancy, and the woman does not experience discomfort in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I see another man to whom an arrow has penetrated his face and the wound is hardened and the arrow is left inside, without causing any pain here, and it resembles this in appearance.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's prince's face, which was embedded in the middle of his nose and had already deflected to the right side of his mouth, being completely hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called upon to assist in his treatment around three days after the insertion of the arrow.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I examined the wound of the arrow's insertion carefully; and then I inquired about that under the delicate test, and did not feel it; but he felt it sharply under his right ear, and then I suspected that that point was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And then I filled the place with an emollient and restorative substance, confirming to myself that this is where the attractive and digestive power resides, as it shows me the location of the arrow, so that it can be removed from there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it does not happen in the significant location where you have hit with the arrow, this is due to its proper place; and I continued applying the emollient on him for several days without causing an accident; the wound consolidates meanwhile, and the patient feels the pain inside his nose after a few days, and he recounts this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I placed acute corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened up, and under the test I examined that area, and then I carefully examined the tip of the subtle arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the wound opening with that acute medicine until it became visibly clear to me the tip of the arrow, and I passed that time with this process for about four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound had become enlarged, it became possible for me to insert scissors in him, and refine that area, without causing any pain. Then I did not cease trying various mechanical methods of handling this object, after which one day I began applying forceps extraction on him, according to the shape of those at the tip of the arrow, until I could finally extract it; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors thought that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and I did restore it and the wound consolidated. The patient is now fully healed, and there is no damage in him for any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you about the quality of extracting some arrows, that you should follow this rule and significance about what I have not said. For the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend them freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the craftsmen are wise in comparing many on a matter; and about what is present compared to what is absent; and you find new operations and new instruments when accidents occur regarding foreign causes of this art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not extraneous to the members where they are embedded, but according to two methods: either by piercing the location in which they enter; or by the opposite of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is embedded through the location gives entry, or the arrow proceeds in a meaty place, and it is thrown and extraneous.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not experience any discomfort during the time it was hit, then it is advisable that you leave him for several days until the flesh around it subsides, and that the entry of it and its exit are eased.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is embedded in bones and you do not experience any discomfort, leave him for several days and then repeat this with the entry and movement every day, until it is extraneous.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not experience any discomfort for several days, then it is advisable that you pierce in the circuit of the arrow at the bone of every part moving through a subtle travel where the location becomes enlarged by the arrow, and then extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bones of the head and has progressed in one of the brain's ventricles, and appears inside his body with those accidents that I have described, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave him until his being equates for several days; whereas if the arrow penetrates to the cerebrum, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the cerebrum, and remains inside his body for several days, and no accident occurs from any cause like those described, then you handle with the entry of the arrow and its entry into him.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is moving and you do not experience any discomfort in removing it, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for the location so that it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is already hidden in the body's location, and it is hidden from feeling, then you inquire about that under the test, and if you feel it, then pull it with such instruments as are suitable for its entry.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot handle him due to the constriction of the wound and its length in the preon, and here is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut into the wound so that it becomes enlarged and that it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is the earlobes that are pierced by which they hang, then you liberate the flesh in which all parts are embedded from every organ; and use your skill here, if you cannot about the expulsion of the flesh in the breakage of the earlobes and their twisting within where you must abide.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you manage the removal of the needle in any location where it is, then use your twisting with forceps at all parts within which that needs to follow; and finesse from behind subtlety so that the needle is not broken and that it makes your difficult extraction of it and of that removal.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot about that of your time, then let for some days within which the parts are in the circuit of you, and soon iterate that which is later relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	May it if your feel contradictory blood flow, then you administer what we have said of treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill in the incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and apply your best means to remove the needle; and do this with ease, calmness, speed, and firmness as I have advised you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore when you make the needle contract by itself so that the patient follows the figure according to which you must place the insertion of the needle in them, which is more convenient.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	May it if this is not within your possibility, then you administer that which is within your possibility through the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	May the needles that are pierced outwards against another part, or which already proceed some parts from inside to outside, or make the extremity of the needle flexible by feeling above the connecting part and sometimes over it; therefore touch that one; and cut there; and do this according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; then pull that one, as it is done lightly against the feeling.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	May it if it is held in the earlobe, then you twist the needle according to the opposite direction within which the needle penetrates into the earlobe, and enlarge your insertion, and then extract that one.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, let that be for some days, and soon iterate that within you ignite.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the body of the needle is in that place, then push that one towards you.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May it if the stem is broken and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert that one, if it is deaf, shake the bottom for such that enters the cavity of you into the tip of the needle, and then push that one towards you.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	May it if the needle is concave, then push that one with strong shaking entering there, for the needle is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the needle is elongated, then cover that all flesh in which is there, if this is within your possibility, and soon treat that with what seems appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the needle is in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to you that you touch that with the handle, and if this is within your possibility to cut over that, then cut over that and keep yourself from incision of vein or nerve, and extract that, and soon consider the wound if needed, and treat that until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps with which needles are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them be like a duck's bill that are made as pliers when they take hold of the needle so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are made special points, large, few and intermediate, according to the quantity of the size of the needle and its slightness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction there.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the concave thrust at this pointed end thus like that of an ox for it to relieve the inner part of the needle in you, and impulse of that deaf one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the thrust at the deaf end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus like a spear for it to relieve the inner part in the concave needle and is pushed towards that one.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Regarding phlebotomy of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy from which blood is usually drawn are .xxx,. of which there are sixteen in the head. These are the two pulsating veins which are near the earlobes, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in both temples noticeable; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of each nostril, called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle location of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the upper lip; and two veins that are below the lower lip; and — these are the veins called algelic; and are two veins that leave the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	May it is known that the veins which are subjected to phlebotomy in the arms are .v., or five. Among those are one cephalic, which is of the wild heart; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and deafly, it is a medium-sized vein, composed of a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic; and name that the people "the whole body's vein", and basilica is the vein placed in the domestic heart, and named "citillar", and they call it by the vulgar "the vein of the belly"; and arm muscle veins, which are placed on the artery, and this is where phlebotomy takes place, and it is the one that appears above the elbow through a manifest appearance; and salve shea, which is the vein between the mentioned auricular and the small one called pus, and there are two branches of it.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the arm and chest are three veins; one of those is responsible for conveying the curvature of the wild lizard's lung; and the second is sophena, with its location corresponding to the lung cavity of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, whose location corresponds to the cavity of the wild lizard's lung; and in the chest are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The young veins near the ears are in ancient channels and cause drainage, bleeding, and ulcers on the old bad parts of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of this is according to what I advise you: it should be applied at the forehead of the head illness, and rubbed on the top of the head in the area between the two veins with a thick cloth for good friction; then strengthen the patient's body with a bend under which the two appear, their locations being near the ears in two pre-ear areas of the head; apply this to you as instructed, and if you feel the pulse of this as instructed, it works like a test.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Close you take the surgical knife, and that is the one that strikes, close you insert those fingers into the vein into the canal where the blood flows to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And close you lift your hand to the vein and canal to the upper parts, then cut the vein starting from where it strikes.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And make the length of the cut equivalent to two fingers or a bit more than that; allow the blood to flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And close strengthen with powders and leave it where it is until it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already, in the beginning of this treatise, we discussed the cut of these and their cautery treatment.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The two arteries that are in the blood vessels of the templars during the juvenile period of bloodletting cause ancient and evil bleeding, frequent conjunctivitis, and sudden, excessive body aches in humans.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing bloodletting on these is according to what I advise you: strengthen the patient's body with movement under which the two veins appear through manifest appearance, and demonstrate your pulse as instructed by me; then you will test it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And close you raise the canal above the vein to the upper parts as instructed, then insert the bloodletting tool in an incision position under your guidance, and lift the vein up there; then cut that too just like you did with the other veins. Then let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And close loosen the constriction of the patient's body, place your instruction on the vein for an hour, then pause over that part and apply powders to strengthen it with firm pressure, and leave it where it heals.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the recall of them, and their incisions, and the extraction have been introduced at the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the juvenile period of bloodletting for the vein at the forehead is similar to bloodletting in the occiput for ancient head illnesses on the face and gout, rash, and stinking ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of this bloodletting is according to what I advise you; that means that the patient strengthens their body with a bend where the vein appears; and close take the tool which is named the fossor, whose form is as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the tip of the fossor on the part of it that is at the head, above that vein, and hit it against it either straight or in another way as yours, let the blood flow according to the amount you want; then close release the hole in the body and strengthen it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some veins are opened during bloodletting at the site, but note that this type of bloodletting tool does not have a pointed tip like others, instead it has a rounded tip. This particular bloodletting method runs perpendicular, where the bone is close and quite light; if it's too thin, the bloodletting tool would break through when being used.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The time for the juvenile period of bloodletting from the two veins that are in the tear ducts of each eye due to inflammation of the eyes and rash on the face, as well as head illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient should strengthen their body with a bend, and perform this bloodletting, while you stand over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting should be done perpendicular with a length of just a few, where in the place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting tool is thin, its end will break because it's quite light.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And close let the blood flow as much as necessary to you, then pause over that area and strengthen it for a night, then close release those areas.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The bloodletting for the vein in the nose is related to acute fever and intense heat, as well as head illnesses and gout that occur on the face, especially if they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this bloodletting is that the patient should strengthen their body and place their nose under your left hand, take the fine, long tool and put it in the middle of the nose's head according to the straight line; where the vein doesn't appear here, and where the blood starts flowing immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Be sure to finish your hand with the bloodletting tool gradually and let the blood flow as needed; then close that place for a night, as that is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The youth of the bloodletting procedure for the two guides to constriction, to the onset of leprosy, and to skin diseases as well as dyspepsia and bad corrosive ulcers, such as erysipelas.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of this bloodletting procedure is that the patient supports each one on their back with their arms; and the doctors are above the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a mattress.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform bloodletting on the vein along its length; and gradually make bloodletting on ample little cuts; and then extract blood according to the season, quantity or according to what is necessary that you do; and pretend it's like another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then untie the ligament and strengthen both veins by means of a tie in the middle, so that the patient does not get infected, let them rest until after night when the illness is cured.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The youth of the bloodletting procedure for veins in the alergetic condition, confirms to small pustules and pimples on the mouth and gum rot and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are within the nose and in the circulation of the body.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of this bloodletting procedure is that you cut in front of the patient, and strengthen their neck with a bend, then move around the lips and watch over which two veins there are; one of which is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left; and demonstrate each by the color of each of both, and what is more is that within the circulation of those veins there are small dark ones; and then you penetrate each with an incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt, then leave it to you, and if you do not know which one of those is, then understand the incision of the larger of those, and the obvious pus from those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make as if there are two veins in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Traduction :
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are in the tongue, when treated with youth, are similar to bloodletting of the cephalic type at pre-illnesses found in the gullet, throat diseases, and mouth sores.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting these is that you follow the tongue between your hands in front of the sun, elevate the tongue for them, observe their tongue, from one side of their vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bloodlet each one; and watch that you do not finish your hand in bloodletting these, for these are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bloodlet in the armpit are in those where it is customary for all men, and the bloodletting of them is done according to two ways, or place on the bloodletting with the mirtilate or olive subtlety; or stop at bloodletting with a surgical knife, and call it appling, and this is the form of that:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this appling is that you fit to section and of those are special parts and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of bloodletting mirtil:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And the parts of that are like this when needed, and you fit to open the veins that are concave and full, proceeding with apparent large vessels, and those which contain hard fat.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive bloodletting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of less width and of finer subtle extremity, it's suitable for bloodletting of finer subtle veins that contain fine subtle pus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The youth of the bloodletting procedure for the basilic vein which is one of three veins: you extract the pus from the throat and neck diseases, as well as from the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is for the bloodletter, when performing this bloodletting, to guard against that and be above fear in that, where your patient has an artery, and if he misses or adjusts during the bloodletting puncture, he will penetrate that artery and cause flows of pus, so beware not to use a sharp bloodletting tool before stopping it with appling.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by obvious manifestation, then beware that you leave it and change to another, or try one of its branches; or bloodlet at the end of your arm where this is manifest; and stop that with a surgical knife in the same way as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want bloodletting of the median plane, then go in front of the constriction on the arm where you touch the place inside that you know the location of the pulse, and watch over it with your hand; and adjust the arm and stop the vein at the concave section with surgical knife as we have said; and beware that there is no percussion for some space in the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you touch it, with strengthening the ligament, inflation occurs in the place that you have placed under your hand, then that inflation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the pus flows in bloodletting like a child's urine, and this pus is subtle redness, then you know that it is of artery pus; and then you cover your hand for as long as spaces were said about that; and then hold your hand until you notice that the redness disappears, once the redness has disappeared, then strengthen your arm and let that be.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from cold sweat, and the excess fear of them, and do not let him suffer for a few days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the disease is not eradicated, and when you must not provide medicine to him, then you enter the artery if it appears to you; where the extremity of the patient is contracted, and the disease is removed; or that you take a small piece from the pulse, perform that operation, and take one larger part and apply pressure on the place of the vein during the strictness until the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the disease is eradicated, it's good; and otherwise, then treat that with the medicine from which he was preceded to recall the place of the elimination of dust in the flow of the disease.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And removing the cause of the disease from him is difficult in various conditions due to the small area of the wound and the possibility of the spread of infection in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	When dealing with the black vein's phlebotomy is juvenile that extracts the disease from the part above the head and to the part below the body; thus, since it consists of branches of the basilica and cephalic veins as we have mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And direct the phlebotomist who has excess fear in the phlebotomy of you, because that one leaves behind is a nerve; and therefore adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy and find the nerves, it will happen to him dizziness, making his recovery difficult, and he may not be fully cured. And this nerve appears with feelings sometimes; if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and is not shown, then when you make your phlebotomy on the section of the arm where you are phlebotomizing on, avoid touching the nerves with your strength, and when you make the phlebotomy, do not choose a section that might contain veins, and avoid hitting the nerves in your stronghold.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you make the incision of the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The juvenile phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that you extract the disease from the head and connect it to the patient's arms.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And take care in this manner, if you want the phlebotomists to puncture on an olive or on a myrtle phlebotomy; which is the preserved blood of all veins, without leaving your artery or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must agree that when it comes to phlebotomy, you do not pierce the tip of the wart merely, and look for a small area of pus instead, without disturbing him, if it is not found on the first percussive examination that appears some places under the phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, strength is lost in some people when phlebotomy is not performed on the first percussion, but does not notice under that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	That is the quality of phlebotomy from which and its accidents are motivated, in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is that you know that phlebotomy should only be administered for the preservation of health and with hope and caution for recovery, and when performed on one of the veins located near the heart; namely cephalic, black, and basilica; and it is done during spring, before meals in spring and autumn, and in winter just before eating, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it is done phlebotomy and leave the first three hours that have passed since dawn.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy that is administered, whether when it provides convenience and necessity or at night or during the day, at any hour and in every season.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And be aware that an infant should not have phlebotomy until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should only undergo it during the first trimester before the seventh month, and elderly persons should not undergo phlebotomy if they have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, know that before the phlebotomy with leon's powder, they should modify their intestines. If in those ones have a hidden wound, so that the veins do not pull excess from the intestines during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are cleansed and do not flow into the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not undergo phlebotomy for patients with night sweats and debility, nor from illness or intoxication until they are cured of them, nor from liver disease, and more that phlebotomy be feared during colic pain and during vomiting, and during belly ache, and during multiple sexual activities and labor pains, and during all causes that dissipate their virtue, either physically or mentally.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider delicately in eliminating body fluids before that if the disease is large, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it's possible for him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And consider taking baths if any cause doesn't prohibit it, or by engaging in some exercise so that the disease is eliminated.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And schedule your phlebotomy during the day, around the time of three o'clock in the afternoon, as we have mentioned.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And be mindful that the day of all animal accidents should be kept in check on this particular day of all illnesses and accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor pains and unnecessary grief or sexual activity.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to their satisfaction, let there be presented the causes in the use of which men customarily delight in aromas and scent, and like balsam and perfumes according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the bloodletter follow on a cushion that is placed under the one where it should be bloodlet, as to the one who was supposed to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extend his arm, and rub it with the doctor's hand using the bloodletting tool for two or three times; and adjust it on the belt and encircle it in two places.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the constriction is mild, or if the constriction isn't equal, or if the constriction is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of the wind. Or if it's due to soothing, then prohibit the movement of the wind in the body.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And for the constriction, have the one who was to be bled rub their hands in between them until the veins are swollen, and make them feel this through touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And for the bloodletting tool, smear it with a little ancient medicinal oil; then place your right hand's index finger on that vein, leaving the location where you want the bloodletting. So that the vein escapes a little, and the percussion is stopped when you find the vein like heart escaping, this is where you should perform bloodletting, and from these it is full of windiness, and when you place the bloodletting tool on that spot it contracts; then uncover the bloodletting tool; and the bloodletting tool does not pierce the vein, but if it does, that one is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, have the bloodletting tool set and fully informed about all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the bloodletting tool, but if the vein is punctured in one place, then this happens; and otherwise, repeat this on another spot by placing it a little further, or over them with haste, if that spot has not hardened.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot has hardened, or the patient feels hot, then you let it rest for one or two days, and do not adjust the bandage, so that a hard boil does not push out pus with heat, nor enter into dampness.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if she wants more, repeat the bloodletting.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and the wind is subtle underneath, and you fear that it won't expel enough wind, then repeat the bloodletting according to rectitude and adjust in the incision a little, and do this with haste before the spot hardens. For men of soft flesh, you should wait a little incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if you have already hardened that area, then do not repeat over it, for there is no excuse for any cause; pause over it some part of the oil channel, which delights the body of wind.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this area that it be oil and that other oils not be used.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer oil channels in all bloodlettings where blood vessels should be prohibited from wind of the body, and do this with turpentine oil and lavender when it is paused on one of those spots, for windiness and agitation occur when it is applied to a thick layer.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of bloodletting large boils are generated, which occur with many points, especially when someone has not been bled except at that point, or on a small part of the vein incision, then you cover and pause over that area with an infused sponge in water, a little scraped, and heat it for one hour until it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And have them do this at the movement of the wind from that vein in harmony with its own or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains any darkness or greenness in that spot for some days, do not notice this; and if you want to, pause over that with a cause of aloes or myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calamus or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And if many points arise, boils and protrusions require bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over it, and if you later find softness, then your compression over it is correct, so that this protrusion is bad; then take care to pause over it with any of the causes we have mentioned, for strongly it will flow from the wind artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And let it be plastered with water in which it is steeped, so that the area lasts, and then take care of it with any other treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And have them extract the wind from all humans according to their virtue's quantity and according to the prevailing color over the wind as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the wind is black, then you let it out until it reddens; similarly, if you find it thick, you let it out until it becomes fine; and likewise, if it's sharp, within it should be cooled down its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for the one who is full and strong and needs to extract wind in one place, extend the bloodletting on the vein and make the bloodletting tool large.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite of this, and have them extract it in many points, and that the incision be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best way to perform bloodletting on veins is for it to be a cross section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of phlebotomy saves from the flow of pain and from the dissection of nerves, and is useful and safe when performing bloodletting according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	In this case, it is customary for fainting due to lack of blood supply, you should perform phlebotomy, and before you treat that with phlebotomy, give them a small amount of infusion of milk thistle or simple diluted oxymel; and remove some of the pain from their body in three stages or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is due to a complex condition, then take an infusion before phlebotomy with myrrha water or flavored honey water with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or with an aromatic and pleasant-smelling syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs you should perform phlebotomy, and it is due to the loss of bodily fluids, then give them to drink water from their body and a pleasantly subtle-smelling syrup; use aromatics in this way, and limit their movement with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we have discussed in the division for treatment of fainting through evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to improve their arm and dissolve their pain after the second occurrence, for this purpose phlebotomy is by means of bodily evacuation, and the virtue of which is coolness, that gradually eliminates the pain little by little, so it depends on the amount of the virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And whoever wants to improve their arm and get rid of their pain in the second occurrence, and their body is strong, then do this seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And whoever wants to bring the blood of their body in the opposite direction from where it declines, then let them improve on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And for that body in which there is already blood disturbance and it becomes severe causing fever, then let them release their blood once and make a large amount of bleeding so as to intensify the sensation before fainting occurs; and you should conserve all conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on their wrist to prevent death instead of fainting. When the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent, then these stages should be performed this way.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to relieve the arm and evacuate the blood after the second time, as long as the openings of the veins are closed and it becomes difficult to discharge the blood, you should press under that forcefully and slightly bend his leg, which is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let him rest for this after performing phlebotomy again; or keep doing this until the coagulation of blood in the opening of the vein stops due to phlebotomy; or place your hand on a piece of Turkish red clay, or aloe vera, and press slightly under it so that the blood is expelled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is swollen, then let him rest and do not touch it until the hematoma subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to cause him to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then you should prick him over that spot or on another arm at another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein referred to as "arm's cord" is phlebotomized in the place of the gall or the basilic vein, when they are not twisted or hidden, which is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that he immerses his hand in hot water until it easily turns red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And apply it firmly over that with ligature and a narrow bandage; and perform phlebotomy according to the transverse direction, not longitudinally nor according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the sensation be wide and your phlebotomy with which you perform phlebotomy on that point of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in hot water, and similarly you should let the blood flow in hot water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy for this vein is particularly safe compared to all others, since it leaves you without a pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the wrist of the right hand is relevant to stomach diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that you strengthen your hand with ligature or with your own hand, since you place it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and can be demonstrated by pressing; and perform phlebotomy transversely on that; and if you pierce all over it does not bleed back.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And make sure not to end your hand in phlebotomy, because that leaves the nerves of the fingers exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And apply your hand in hot water and let the blood flow through it, because if you do not immerse that in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as the blood is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then you should pause on the vein oil and salt so that it does not become consolidated thickly; similarly, let this be done in all branches straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The youth of the phlebotomy of that on my left hand, it is referring to the maladies of the liver.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do likewise in the phlebotomy for him as you did for the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The youth of the venous phlebotomy is for liver diseases located in your body's left side, just as with liver diseases and retention of menses, and for those of the gallbladder and ulcerous conditions of thighs and old sores, and they resemble other diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the phlebotomy for him is that he introduces his palm into a caudal water and does rubbing in the area where veins become visible; place your hand on the chest joint; locate the apparent vein path near the said position, and from there its branches flow into the wet surface of the chest.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore perform a phlebotomy for the full gallbladder or release the organ from your hand according to its location, follow the addition towards this position, it is better and yields more blood.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the chest surface, then protect yourself from the nerves that are around there on the chest surface, and place your phlebotomy tool at the point where you're performing the phlebotomy across, as if you wanted to penetrate it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And do the bloodletting as necessary.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	And if bleeding is forbidden through the mouth; then you immerse his foot in the caudal water and lets the blood flow within where it's drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting tool misses in the first attempt, then try again with bloodletting on its own a little bit more where it's bleeding; and don't worry about harming him, but be careful of the nerves as we've said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do for the gallbladder on the other side equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we've said, you should place your hand on the exit point of the wild body part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The youth of phlebotomy for him is when it comes to hip pain due to bleeding.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of phlebotomy for him is that the liver enters into bathwater, rushes and strengthens his thigh in the middle of the hip under his hand above four fingers on a long thin bend which only appears like this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy for that according to each organ that is within your capability and according to the cross-section, which is better; or you make an incision in it by cut-off or you remove it by searing, where its location is clear.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And she's in a thick male condition; and if you find that, but it doesn't manifest entirely, then perform phlebotomy on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears behind the heart and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And watch out for nerves, let the blood flow in the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then untie the constriction and place your hand on the phlebotomy site, then strengthen that area which will quickly heal.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventillation and the qualities to use those [tools or methods].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilation can be done with horns, reeds, or pipes.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is performed in two ways: one of them involves incision and blood extraction, and the other involves ventilation without making an incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This form of ventilation that involves no incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without using fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And of the ventilation that is given with incision and blood extraction, there are fourteen locations in the body. The first one is where bloodletting is done, which is the alnocrati part at the end of the head; the middle location is on both sides of the collarbone area inside; the next one involves ventilation close to the mandible left side of the mouth and right side of the mouth; then there are ventilation for two spatulas; ventilation in the alhoster place, which is near the anus; ventilation from two lamps, and they're about two fists apart; ventilation on both sides of cavils; and finally, ventilation at both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventilation does not extract blood but from small superficial veins in the flesh, and thus it does not have the power through those means; similarly to how bloodletting works. Nor is it necessary for ventilation to be done with fire or without using fire in any liver ailment where the body as a whole has been filled up so that the body gets completely drained out.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	And if necessity compels for ventilation due to liver issues or continuous discomfort, administer that in every phase of the month and at its end, as well as in the middle of it and at any other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This is the reason why in men it occurs when there's an increase of blood within them upon their need for extraction through ventilation and finds its severity and heat; and among those, they find swelling and harshness on their face and head, and in their collarbone region; and among others, they feel irritation on their face and forehead along with darkness and confusion in their senses; and among some, the location of their ventilation changes; and among others, their laughter increases; and among some, they experience a taste for blood in their mouth, or their tongue becomes reddened and discharges blood; and among some, their sleep is increased, and among those who feel discomfort from blood during sleep, restlessness, pains, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	When it comes to any cases of those conditions, and particularly if it's in the liver or spleen of the stomach, then it is commanded that suction should be performed because after a few hours from day two or three.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	A young person for neck suction is when that is affected by gravity in the head and to what settles in the lungs; may this be a nearby evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This suction is at the site of the cephalic phlebotomy location.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it's not written that you should use what causes friction or in which there is catarrh, which gives rise to a great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason do not use those old methods, and in the heads where there are maladies of fever.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And for him who continues above that, it is made to forget; and so you should command the suction operator that he should place a small amount of the suction device near your parts, fearing the generation of forgetting.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Alcohol suction is at the site of phlebotomy for the dark vein and the basilica: so it causes asthma, and constriction, and splitting of the alcohol stomach, and coughing, and fullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it's known that the alcohol suction should be small; if left for too long, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	Alkaghdan suction causes headaches in the head and ophthalmia, and migraines, and hyperemia, and toothaches; this is at the site of phlebotomy for the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it's to command the suction operator not to press their hand with a scalpel so as not to pierce an artery and cause the flow of pus.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And mouth suction causes alcohol in the mouth, and decay of the gum, and symptoms similar to those diseases that occur in the mouth, and are at the site of phlebotomy for the alveolar veins which are in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The suction that is performed on the two spoons causes heat, which is caused by fullness of quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the suction of the two areas inside the lungs causes youthfulness from phlebotomy of three veins, which is that of the basilic vein, dark and cephalic, as this draws the pus from all those large veins found in the flesh, and those small veins of other veins that lie between the larger ones so that the suction reaches to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the suction operator not to proceed with incision, where the place is stripped of flesh, and leave your nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it's a suction on which hemorrhoids are sucked, causing rectal bleeding and leaving pus ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it's known that you should command the suction operator to use a large suction method, and one made of silver, where the place requires strong drying; and for them apply subtle suction tubes and then perform incisions.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The suction of the small abdominal areas through obvious reduction removes pus from the entire body and relieves old chest pains and menstrual pains, and bladder; they also cause menstruation and relieve indigestion. They are at the site of phlebotomy for two small intestines, and aortic arches, and two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting in older men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And for the suction of the aortic arch, it is youthful to the youthfulness of the abdominal suction.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the suction is that you place the suction at the beginning view and continue for a while with warm preparation, do not prolong the position of the suction, more pause those lightly, and let them cool down, and make the fluids reach the place evenly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this until you see the place already reddening and swelling, and that the color of pus appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you perform incision gradually, and in small quantities, and mainly take into account the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has rare flesh and veins, it's known that you should perform incision once and not more, so as to prevent the area from becoming ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the suction operator to expand the incision and make it a little large, always facilitating the flow of suction.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the pus is thickened, it's known that you should perform two incisions, in which during the first one, open the pathway for subtle extraction to the pus and his liquidity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And during the second one, inspecting the acquired extraction of thick pus removal.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the pus is moist and fecal, it's to be performed incision for the third time in order to obtain the remainder.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gradually, when we want to extract small amounts or a little of pus, until for us one incision is enough.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want extraction of thick pus, we make a large incision; and if we know that the pus is thick, it's known that you should perform extraction through wave-like incisions.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of incision in which the depth of the cut is only so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the channel of that person is thick, hard, dark, and their veins are strained, it's known that the locations of the suction devices should be gently smeared, more open, decisively resolved; when in summer time, such as with aloes oil or violet oil, or melon seed oil, or cinnamon resin oil; and if it is in winter time, then with narcissus oil, or lemon balm oil, or chamomile oil, or with pus oil, and among those.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is large, cool it, then use oil of turmeric, or camphor oil, or aloes oil, or nutmeg oil, and apply them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the collector is of wide pores and has flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and it should allow this to the places of the openings of their collectors close to the suction, to be washed with water or with sunflower oil, or with water from aloe, or with water from rosemary, or similar things applied to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose suction is of moisture, wash his collectors with vinegar or with water from mint and sumac, or similar things applied to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are large, wash his collectors with old vinegar or with water of sage, which is basil, or from decoction of nutmeg, or from chamomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it should be noted that the suction is kept facing the bath; you should administer it close to the bathing water for an hour or two, and also let her sleep near the suction.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that needs to be done before performing a bloodletting procedure with respect to the collector?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And when considering the meal: if the collector or one who is to undergo phlebotomy has a choleric and hot disposition with inflammation in his veins, then it should be taken cold substances, as for example vinegar salads, lettuce in vinegar and milk, secalin, and julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And let her have food like chicken or pork from fattened rabbits, and seasoned foods with herbs, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose body is cool, it should be taken to drink asarapalm oil or asarapalm of alsecanabin from seeds and sumac; vinegar mixed with aromatic wine halfway between old and new; and it should be recommended to her that she uses moderation in drinking and eating, and pauses her meals of chicken, rabbit, pigeons, and small rabbits and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it should be noted that on the day of suction and bloodletting, her intake of fluids should exceed her food consumption.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to drink in some hours before giving some men thyme alephrac, or muscle medicines such as muscatel or garlic, before suction or before bloodletting or nearby, so that the main parts are comforted and the disposition becomes subtle; but it should not be taken that cold broth.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The collectors that are subjected to scarification should be collectors placed on the belly, over gout and over the umbilicus, in the areas of the knecks, and the plexus of the abdomen, as these members do not suffer from scarification on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not done with those but with the pain of the body's disposition, such as suction on nipples in mastitis from the flow of body's disposition of the nose; and we use that to dissolve the congestion and relieve wind, such as placement over the belly and umbilicus; which that hardens the member and stirs it up and resolves the pain caused by wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it should be placed over the livers when they occur in their development or before ejaculation, for the force of attraction causes the body to develop and eradicates the seminal emission from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when it is placed on the belly and the back, it causes wind in those confined areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these collectors are administered with broth alone; some administrations are made with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some administrations are completely filled with hot water in the mastitis of the belly.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the suction should be filled and there should be large pus, either hot water alone or hot water in which herbs are cooked as appropriate.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Procedure for suction administered with fire: make the size of the opening two fingers wide, according to how we have made it; the quantity of blood is almost up to a hand's width; and it should be on the back, in the place that is in the circulation, half of it, let the tube be small according to the amount that enters it with one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of elderberry or citrus, with thick margins, lion's balm, equal and clean so that it does not move the member to its rightful position on you.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of your elderberry or iron rod, where the candle is placed when it's in the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this suction should be larger than the one we have recommended; and use less grease according to the mastitis and the condition of the one who uses that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suckers of children and exhausted ones are different from those of young people and with large circulations.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction on a member is to spread the charcoal in fire from good wood before a small wax candle flame, and place that over the middle of the crossbeam in the middle part of the suction so that the fire be lit close to your side for it not to burn the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed on the body of the patient, and let us say over the tube that we have said, within which when we have the collectors and they do not seem to bear the tube and smoke over that tube, then the suction will dissolve immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And properly apply the fire according to their manner, and continue this process until you have finished with it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In a wet blanket used in the illness of pleurisy, there is no cross or twisting water inside it, and it is not administered unless it is full of water, and it is placed only on the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this wet blanket, the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguations (blood-sucking treatments) are not administered on moist members but on those parts of the body where it is impossible to place a suction cup due to their small size, such as the gums and similar areas; or on uncovered flesh parts, like the nose and those that resemble it.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality to use those you have found, which are in the water of the old world's fluids.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them lie throughout the day and night in water that is old, so they don't cause any harm inside their stomachs; and let the body be emptied of blood and by suction; and let you rub the parts of the affected area until they turn red; and let them be placed on the patient.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled up, and in case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you can find a place with suction from the area by using a suction cup, it's better to do so early in adulthood.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with warm water and apply hot water; and rub it and press out its contents.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the disease has extended to the site where the sanguissuguations are applied, and it is like this residue, then you immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place that above them until the discharge subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the disease is multiplied, then apply powdered vitriol or the like substances that are used in stiptics over it, until the disease is absorbed; or place the ashes of burnt fava beans over the area and let them remain until the fava beans adhere to the area, until the disease is absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat blood-sucking treatments, as it's possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood-sucking treatments are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with recent disease or leave a needle in those areas where it causes the disease to start spreading; and let them be placed, so that when there is any disease it spreads immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to heal, apply a little of powdered aloen or salt or ashes over those, and let it cure immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And thus begins the treatment for the remaining part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter deals with necessary treatments in the art of medicine; it involves restoring fractures and accidental displacements in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, know that people who study this chapter are doctors and laypeople, as well as those who have forgotten the teachings of the ancients and do not even read a single word from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scholars in our land is kept private; I have not forgotten everything over time; and I did not include anything that I learned directly from them, but only after reading their works extensively and studying their understanding to extract knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And let him direct towards experimentation and study throughout his lifetime.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that is part of my science and about which extensive experiments have been conducted. Thus, I abbreviate this for you others and relieve myself from the task of long explanations; then abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and illustrate this at the end of description; and formulate this into various forms that are administered in that, just as I did in two previous chapters regarding addition of description, similarly to what I have done in those.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from existing fractures of bones, from which it is necessary to have a preview before we begin recalling the fractured members and various aspects.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	And thus, when you speak about the introduction of this chapter, mention summaries of the discourse; and those chapters that are understood by artisans at the beginning will be built upon their knowledge or understanding of these. These include both you and those who readily understand such noble arts from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or dislocation occurs, then you should take care at the beginning with bloodletting or treat that area, or any time, if no cause is forbidden, such as increased vitality, or it's the place where this happens unexpectedly, or old age, or it's the time of strong heat, or strong rubbing.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And take care to eat food made of herbs and fowl meats and crab meat; and forbid large meats and fill yourself with all foods that fill the veins of disease, so you're safe from developing pus under the skin. And if you don't fear the leakage of material into the body part.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return your body to its initial state that is customary for it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you should feed your body with nutritious foods that are motley and dense in which it has viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, nuts, fish, bellies of cows, eggs, fresh meat, thick foods similar to these, and under this regimen there is a slight coagulation of pus from the fracture and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones harden when they are in men who are in the first half of life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to remain constant and be consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their body parts.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they harden and remain constant according to their nature all the time due to the drying of those body parts. They continue and are consolidated from their bones at the end of old age, like the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and heals over the broken bone from every part for a similar cause to scorching in which thickness adheres and strengthens that inside it. They glue together and bind it inside as they coagulate together and solidify at intervals, inside where the end of strength and firmness comes, like fire at the beginning, within which no prohibition stops that from his works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the foods of the belly, foods in which gravity and viscosity and thickness exist as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fractures according to the diversity of the body part.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the body parts, a fracture of the bone in the pelvis is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; and similarly all other bones are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I recall all kinds of fracture, described in its chapter distinctly from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures within oneself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of bone fracture within them are diverse; some occur in their vertebral column; and sometimes fractures happen according to the length of the bone: these include fractures from the scapula and stars and those not originating from them, like when writing is prepared. They are gouty fractures and disruptions in the head, and they are small crack fractures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every kind there is its own or turmoil in the restoration according to how each will be distinctly remembered in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thus, this is how bone fracture is known: it is the curvature of it, and that prominence and connection to sensation from it, and the feeling when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no visible curvature and it is not felt by your touch when you press the bone with force on the body and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not here a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there could be curvature or a small crack, just know how you feel it when you touch your hand to it and the compression of all. It rests over it from the medicines which will make you remember at that moment what suits the location; and it stretches through subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when it is curved and does not split into two or any other that do not occur in the scapula, if it is widened throughout its whole part by comparison, then know that starting from your time you will correct it whenever it has given rise to a cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it has given rise to cauterization, then smooth that for a few days until the cauterization ceases; and then equalize that according to any manner you can of levitation and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and adjustment of it are much less than in the bone where you have suffered scapula.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to how you will remember it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	And if in the bone there are scapulas, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it's the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one and a hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And if your position is with which you place the member to its natural location equal while the parts are extending from the broken member, then you must force that you return those additions in their own and according to any manner you can put them in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself so that it does not occur on the body due to your operation or injury, and force yourself according to your ability to apply one bone onto another of its best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And know that in that moment profitably you touch with your hand there, and if you find any different cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some old doctors do when their operations cause cauterization or lead to contraction in the body, like we have seen that through the operation of their swollen parts.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connect, balance and decent operation with gentle restriction of that member, rest and tranquility; advise the patient on this and make them avoid causing it to hurt themselves during their vigil or sleep, observe its changes and movements, you need all its resources in full virtue; and wait to see if the position of the body is a position where pain is assured, which causes are when felt in the arrangement of the body's position either due to injury or strain; then know that by changing it to another arrangement of this one from which it does not feel pain; guard against letting this position of it be straight and equal, so as not to cause curvature to occur in the restored member.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the restriction of the broken member is as I have described; and know that limbs fractured are diverse in their size, in their grandeur, and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those who are small like the arm and said it is easy to resemble them, then the covering should be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And of those who are large like the thigh or the chest, ensure that in those cases there is a covering that is both soft and durable, such that the bandage securely connects the large and strong member from all sides with tightness, so as not to allow any stain in them.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin your evacuation of equilibrium, place a sufficiently soft material at that, over the site of that fracture with three or four coverings according to which member it is; and strengthen your hand a little on this material.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then lead him towards the more superior part of the site of the fracture, and strengthen moderately so that your tightness does not exceed the one where you have strengthened the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend the covering of the fracture site slightly, and gradually soften the tightness, until you take over a large portion of the site.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another branch and wrap that other gauze around the tightened site with covering, and gradually lead those coverings towards the more superior part of the fracture; and let your operation in the tightness of this covering and the softening of that happen as we have described for the first covering above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the layers of stopping cloth or cloth that matches the curvature of the fracture, if there is a curvature in it; and if not, do not pause on any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place on the other branch, and properly match over these gauzes that have been neatly made just now, if there is no inflammation or abscess in this area; and then place what is the abscess here and that which causes the inflammation; and leave it for a few days; and then strengthen your hand on these stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stars of the length of cane be rectangular, and formed wisely; or they could be made of wood; or of palm leaves; and make each star according to this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the star placed over that fracture is larger and a little more rectangular than the other stars. The length of each star according to its reading on the member in size and smallness; then strengthen your hand on these stars using another branch as your first tightness; and then lie properly according to what we said about tightness, such that it is your tightness at the location of the fracture more, and the longer you extend from the fracture, the better repair the tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are mixed in pregnancy and fineness, and use many of them; if the threads are large, as I have seen some doctors placing those thick string cords for a number of times during an operation, this is a great mistake when it comes to maintaining equality in tightness.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And it is inconvenient to use thin threads because you will not be able to achieve the tightness you desire with those. Also, ensure that there are no more than a finger's width between each thread.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is made to lie with the ends of the stars near the tightness in the specific areas, then place these stopping cloths or mohair lace between them so that they do not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fracture gauzes are placed on the skin, and there is a disruption in the chain, and I will recall that specifically in the Senate according to uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken limb is bound with stars on the first day; this is because when a limb is large, it may not be able to rest upon the stars without causing injury until about three or seven days later, or longer, depending on your confidence in avoiding an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plastering that the ancients used when restoring them, which are placed upon fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of plastering as briefly described for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex issues and predominantly for women and children, which is done on materials that do not conduct heat or are smooth: and you take the powder from the miller's flour, this being the essence of the flour that comes out when grain moves through the mill walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And apply it in this manner, rather than sift it with egg white, and let the preparation not be too thin or delicate; then proceed to use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for setting broken bones and dislocations: take a recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, almond, and myrrh, each measured in one dragon's weight; add half a dragon worth of frankincense and five dragons worth of aloe; add twenty dragons' worth of clove oil or the albumen of an egg if the patient has been burned. And then use this ointment which is made from good composition and restores slightly broken bones, granting strength to old men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of setting the plaster which helps with fractures and twists: take a recipe of myrrh and white honey in one dragon's weight; add frankincense and aloes worth five dragons each; include six dragons' worth of acacia; and use twenty dragons' worth of Armenian butter.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The text translates as:
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The text translates as:
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	The text translates as:
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	The text translates as:
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	The text translates as: The text translates as:
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	The text translates as:
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	The text translates as:
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	The text translates as:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	The text translates as:
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	The text translates as:
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The text translates as:
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	The text translates as:
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	The text translates as:
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	The text translates as:
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	The text translates as:
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	The text translates as: The text translates as:
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust more in the constriction than in your first constriction entirely, and adjust to the swelling of the food of the patient, according to when the memory is recalled for them.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you have already dried and weakened the area of the fracture more than its depth, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak that with water intensity for your entire duration, which you apply to it; and do this for all three days; and relax the constriction a bit, and thanks to this operation supply nutrients to the limb, and it gets healed slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Adjust this to what the bone restorers do when restoring a limb fracture for another duration than its restoration up to fullness, according to depth and then restoration according to curvature, which is their error in operation, and with great fear. If it were a draftsman, they would expand these ancient ones in their free areas and harden this opened area.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I haven't seen any of them do such a thing, so it is more reasonable that they don't do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	According to the second one: When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are blows, and their figures are various, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures occur due to impact by space force, and the impact stops inside all the bones until they penetrate through the skin, which leaves them intact, just like when wood is split, and thus this type is named "crush". Or the force impacts a part of the bone, impacting the flesh but not passing through to the back of it; and this kind of fracture is called "absolute uplift."
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two fractures is large or small, and for a frictional or compressive fracture; and its cause affects it when impacting on stone or crushing on rock, and they resemble that.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, bringing it close to the marrow which leaves them intact within the bones; or it's in the surface of the bone, and for these two types of fractures, the wound can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for this fracture which occurs within the bone in its subtle hairiness and so is named this specific type of fracture "capillary".
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is the fracture that occurs due to impact or crushing on stone and resembles that, causing some layer of bone to enter its parts inside, and this happens in the concave area as when their impact occurs with the tools used for excavation and their entrance part into the inside areas.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is mostly done in wet bones like those of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of gaseous fractures, they are like separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will recall everything about this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these types of fractures through detection from them and by inquiry about their wounds and corruption of the flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known for being discovered on the bone surface, it is cleaned off, and there's a test on it, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's condition, and if you encounter any symptoms that indicate manifest significance on the body, such as vomiting from cholera, expansion, loss of understanding, seizure, fever, sneezing, and symptoms in those affected, and similar events to the symptoms occurring in severe conditions, it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter abnormal symptoms, you expect healing; then you start treating them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	And the cause is that if you have been hit in the condition like being hit, and this happens during the days of winter, then know that you study in the bone's remnants before day 14 according to every disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it's during the days of summer, then know that you wait until the 7th day, having understood that what is within the bone has been corrupted by the marrow, and these events occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated into the marrow and covers the brain, and it's in small parts that are compressive, then know that you must incise the affected part and grind it according to what I will instruct you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And this is that you assess the head of the injured limb, and uncover on the bone according to custom and your practice as possible given the wound's figure, and it should be minor over the limb.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you, you should detect the bone, pus or abscesses, then you oppose what disturbs you as long as it smells of cloths soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil, and makes the wound rest within so that the abscess is suppressed; and you are sure of blood flows. And then start around the edge of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you incise the bone with a straight-bladed scalpel, and this is its form: And then administer another scalpel of this kind, slightly shorter than that one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more the scalpel slightly longer than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And know that you should have a number of different scalpel blades, among which some are slightly longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the end of their sharpness, and they are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their aid in percussion over the incision to ensure that it does not tear the head or harm there.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then carve out through its channel before you make incisions in the arteries which you name as non-deep arteries.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not so in such cases that those do not reach the edge of the bone of the testis to where it is close by, because at the artery there is a round terminal or margin around which their head resembles an acute edge like a margin or a small circle. This prohibition prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take from these arteries a large number of which each conforms to the thickness of every bone, within which being present in all brains at your disposal, the end of which should be sharp, the amount in length and width should correspond to the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of arteries: The quality of puncturing through the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the artery on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the artery to another location, and pause where you have removed the quantity corresponding to the thickness of the ray or roughly so.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you make incisions with the incision tools where there is any part of the bone, making that subtle pus over it at the end of levitation, as we have said, while you free the bone or with your hand, or by some other means using tools you will have equipped for this, such as forceps and delicate tongs.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure that you take every caution so that the incisioner does not touch any nerve of the spinal cord.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so when you have drilled through the bone and separated it from the spinal cord if this continues with him/her, and you extract it, then make sure that you examine and compare it with the hardness of what is in the bone at another tool similar to an incisioner, but rather make sure that it is a bit harder than the other incisioners.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any part of the small bones and soft ones, then take that with ease with what you should have among the tools; and apply this cure to the wound with herbs and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operation is less invasive and far from pain, which Galien and La Crosse performed through a large incision; this is what it means: in your commencement, you need to start discovering the part of the bone on the spot where the fracture is most intense and most obvious. Once you have discovered that part and placed its extremity on this slow yet steady incision tool (which we will call 'the instrument'), here's how it works:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the circular part is strong and does not cut any nerve, while the sharp part extends in two directions from him/her at the length before you, as often happens; such that the circular part should be aligned with the spinal cord on his/her sharply inclined surface of the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you beat on the incision tool from one side with a small hammer while making an incision through all the bone in ease as it has been rotated, and you are sure of the procedure that does not hit him/her accidentally with any incident, and if the surgeon14 was the most experienced among all humans and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he/she was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And then if any cause is attached to the bone of the surgeon in certain parts of the bone, he will make an incision from him/her using the sharp end of this incision tool that is circular, and he will release it with ease which gets released from his/her nerves and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the surgeon, and whatever is separated or remains of the bone is his/her skin, being hard and soft subtleties, then make sure that you examine that hardness and remove those softnesses with fine razors with which you have prepared a number, in various quantities so that it may be possible for you to administer from them wherever necessary, according to the quality of your operation on this broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And make sure that you administer according to your reasoning when you start removing the bone with these razors, and then use this fine substance of it as close as possible, and do not stop doing this until you manage to distribute the hard and the fine substance from all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And when in any of the other small arterial fractures and subtle fracture, make sure that you provide treatment according to how you lost it for correcting it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is because they are not explained over all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have shown on what we wrote about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is torn when you remove the bone, then make sure that you take lint according to the size of the wound, soak it in rubbed oil, and place it on the wound opening; then take another folded or tripled cloth, soak it in vinegar and rubbed oil, and place it on the first lint, gently apply this to the skin without causing any injury to the spinal cord; then apply a thin layer of wax onto it, do not tighten it but only as much as needed by the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the pus abscess; then remove it and begin to administer medicines which require unnecessary drying, such as linseed oil and flour of earth, powders of ashes and aristolochia, and other substances similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you use this powder medicine to be dusted over the wound, as when they are dry; universally, administer in that all properties of the medicine from which one should cleanse and not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And follow according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment should be clean; and not be in the viscera of ointment or other thing; nor leave adding virulence in it; because when it is applied on the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and sets itself there, and accedes towards the patient near this malign malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the root of the head, as when your face is altered by its bones and much more so when treatment of you is neglected, and there's a darkening on the surface; therefore consider now if accidents happen to the patient that we have said, know that they are perilous altogether.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not turn to darkening but only due to the medicine that is placed upon it, and it results from the virtue of that medicine which causes that darkening, then take a part of honey and part of roasted oil in proportion. And anoint those lines with a cloth, and then place that on the head; and cure that with the spices of treatment within which it suits for healing.
Capitol .iii.	Crown in three parts.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not broken of the nose but two parts at once, or one of those occasionally fractured, because in you there are two bones, the part left is cartilaginous, and is not broken, it does not come to you but swelling and stiffness and stuffiness.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts is broken in you, then know that you should insert this little bone into your nose hole, and equalize that fracture internally according to your indication, and below it externally, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for you with ease, and be careful that it does not fall due to your operation on the patient's face.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose's division, and this bone does not reach there, then know that it should be equalized at the tip of the ray where there is a little thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make as though this was done.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And heal him of you in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and otherwise, then after seven or eight days wait for the discharge from the abscess.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the tip of the nose a piece of cloth if the fracture is in one part or put two chips, if the fracture is in two parts, and in the chip thickness as much quantity that fills the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And as some of the ancient restorers say that the chips should be bound in bandages, and they should be changed throughout the day, though not visible to me; know that the cloth should be bound in egg white paste like a powder of pounded bones; and then let the chip sit until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes there are fractures in the nose, instead of a chip, risking an abundant pus covered with lion's cloth on you; and it is because already has the broken nose with much pus and that the patient cannot perform inhalation.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this reason is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use chips.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there is another abscess on the cautery, plaster your nose with turpentine or with grease that has been heated and roasted oil, or with tallow.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if there is not an abscess on it, then know that you should plaster that externally with saffron flour and with the powder of coffee beans in egg white; and then place a layer of lion's skin over it, and do not harm your nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	And if the bones of the nose are broken in small fractures or are constricted, then know that you should cut on those, and remove those with tools suitable for them; and then dress the incision, and heal it with what promotes growth and consolidation, and apply bandages with what is convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a wound internally in the nose, then know that you should heal it with chips and administer lead canulas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Crown IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	For restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw left is broken and the fracture of it is not in the wound, consider now if the fracture is only outwardly, and is not broken into two parts but bent internally between the parts, then its knowledge is light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And consider therefore, if the fracture is in the right part, that you should insert your left indication into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the right jawbone, then insert your right hand's indication; and drive the tension of the fracture internally with ease to the parts outwardly, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; do this decentrally equalizing that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then know that you should administer extension to both parts according to rightness until it is possible for its equalization.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is commotion of teeth to disintegration, then strengthen those you expect will break in the course of gold or silver or copper; and then place a bandage on the broken jaw with turpentine, and place it on the cloth doubled, and cover it with a decently made large star-shaped patch, or one piece as long as the length of the jaw; and then lay that upon it according to how you have noticed the adhesion of it and what suits its application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and pause their diet for a few days.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has been altered in some way, then take it out on the third day; and fix what was already altered with you, apply the powder of myrrh, the albumen of an egg, or the flour of wheat. Just make sure to have the final bandage ready for him, and place woolen cloth over the bandage.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when this is done and the bandage has been properly applied on him, and if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone, do not move it until he recovers and strengthens the fracture; for this kind of broken bone heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another wound occurs with a carbuncle or scab, then administer what we have said about treating wounds while he is recovering, and ensure that the carbuncle is properly treated.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is due to a bruise, then consider whether it's separated from or stuck with bone fragments. In that case, you carefully remove those fragments using whatever tool suits for their removal during the treatment of such injuries.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds are healed, then you should enlarge them according to your need using the scalpel.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed all the bone fragments and if they are no longer present in the wound, then you should clean out the wound cavity if it is wide; otherwise, cover that area with one of the bandages suitable for it, until it heals.
Capitol .v.	End of chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On restoring the hyoid bone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Broken hyoid refers to the fracture occurring behind the front part of the muscle, and this kind of break can happen in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it breaks, separates, or splits into two parts other than by bone fragments; this makes the restoration of him easier. If there are bone fragments involved, then his restoration becomes more difficult. Or if the break is due to a bruise, that also complicates its restoration.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And during the operation in such cases where the break is due to a bruise, you should have two ministers present for support. One will hold the broken hyoid and follow it along its path, while the other will extend the neck around that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then bind the fracture with your usual methods until its shape is restored according to its original form, without leaving any unevenness or depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then guide the patient's neck support pad or wool, according to its size as per your requirement; extend and elevate the hyoid bone while holding it with your hand until you can equalize the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the hyoid bone to the outside parts, since it's pushed inside towards the front, then guide that the patient should be lying on their back with their neck raised, and place a cushion about half the size over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses against the muscle on both sides until the bone of the hyoid is elevated as it would be when lying down in front; then you correct and equalize the fracture using your usual methods.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel bone fragments and it's stuck in the wound, then guide that cut over there and remove those bone fragments for easier removal.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it's held in the bone, then you devise incision on him using one of the scalpels that you've prepared for this task, because you have placed the hyoid where the surgical instrument serves to cut through the muscles; and that instrument is made of wood or iron as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It resembles a spoon whose shape is like that; and its width depends on how much you need for him according to the size of the bone or the softness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And the length of it should be according to what is feasible in your operation; that there are two ends as usual, and one end is wide while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound disruption you've cut when removing the bone fragment from the bone is large and you are sure of a carbuncle or scab formation, then adjust both edges of the wound for suturing.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small or you fear a carbuncle formation, then cover the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the cut on the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if a carbuncle or scab occurs, then soak cloth in water and oil mixed together, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And the narrowing of the bone when it's due to a wound and section is that you apply a bandage made from wheat flour mixed with egg white, place it over his stop with the patient lying on their back, if needed cover that area with a piece of cloth.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And always, to avoid disturbing the wound, do not open it; and by your care you see how the patient is every day, because when the inflammation has subsided or the wound begins to heal, then you correct this and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's back over their neck, and by placing your hand under the patient while they sleep at night with a small cushion; so that at that time lift the aid of the patient from their waist, and thus raise the fracture of the sternum to an elevation in muscle movement; or let the patient's arm be tied to their chest.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not disturb the inflammation unless it occurs suddenly or forms an abscess, within about twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And replace the dressing if you've noticed the patient's face is as expected, and adjust in the constriction, restore it and smooth until the fracture of the sternum has been restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some patients need time periods like that for healing.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol day.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Restoration of clavicle fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	Spatula tart is broken in the patient's lateral area and not break it from them, but their edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken - and it breaks in the middle of you - and it is not known except by touch, then according to what it is, the figure of the fracture forces your preparation and reduce that according to the natural figure. In every way of art that is within your ability.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And place over the area powder of ground albumin with oil, stop the lion; and place powdered double cloth; and place over the wound a small tabled edge as per the quantity of the spatula or more slightly.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the wound is concave in some parts of the spatula area, then you fill that concavity with lion's wool, and then lift the wound according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And strengthen over with human fat about the constriction, and compress the wound so that it does not swell in its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the inflammation every day; and when it has subsided in all cases, apply another one and strengthen it and equalize the wound if it begins to swell at its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Lay the patient on their left side here.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in 20 days or in 30 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the inflammation, and you should know securely that whatever began from those bones will not be disturbed nor dissolved.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you are dealing with the area of the bone pess and put on this chain, then you split over it, and keep it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the sternum for pus extraction if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol day VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The arm sometimes breaks in the middle of it and thus ends up bent; but its extremities need to be straightened and divided.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents when it breaks in the middle they decline into the parts inside and occur to the great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, weakness, vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that you reposition the patient on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; and press into their muscles, and adjust their ribs to the cushions of two ribs, and refine in your operation and with equalization according to every manner which can be done within your capabilities, so as to return the figure of the bone as you see fit.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And place on the dressing and cover it up with a thin sheet of sause or caligi and match them in levitation, since you envelop that with cloth; then refine that covering over the broken bone so as not to disturb it; strengthen this according to the roundness when you are at the back for some days, and reinforce it with firmness; and consider the bandage always, and when it has subsided, reinforce it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity requires you to disturb that, it causes decay or pressure, or pain, or pus that occurs in the area, then you remove and loosen that and remove the dressing, correct what happens with this manner of treatment; and adjust the dressing if you notice its effect; and reduce the dressing if you see its appearance; and adjust your constrictions until it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol day VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Understand that the break of the ribs does not occur in small places but only in areas that reach both sides; and the extremities of them from their division in front do not undergo this friction but because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Awareness of it is not hidden from feeling, you must inquire about it through the words spoken.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be as close to equalizing the break according to the possible manner, within which it is swallowed according to you, and then apply dressing and strengthen the broken bone with a bandage, if you need that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the break of the ribs is declining into the parts inside, then it affects the back with intense pain and puncture, like puncture that occurs in someone who has caught cold, because the bone puts up a membrane; it also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting; motion sickness; and this is hard to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients were skilled in that manner of treatment.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say of them: press the abdomen with your hand that causes food to ferment inside and induces wind, so that the belly becomes swollen and stretched outwards, and the fracture is driven away from the parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we understand this properly so that it is not a trivial cause to generate a pus-filled blister if it doesn't happen; and if it does happen, then at that moment we already assist in this matter.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say that it is beneficial to be raised above the wind and near to apply heat strongly; this is akin to reasoning, but nevertheless, there is a fear that the wind will drive away excesses due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say: cover the area with wool that has been submerged in heat oil, and place powders between the ribs inside where it is full, so that it becomes as soft as when you envelop this according to its roundness; and apply care for the stomach on the treatment of the pains of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes strong constriction in the stomach which cannot endure, and if you prick the bone gently at the puncture point, fear for the stomach, then let's cut over that area, uncover from the broken rib, and place something underneath that instrument which requires precision beforehand, and pierce the bone with ease, removing it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And if necessary adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large with stitches, and treat that with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if pus occurs inside, then you pinch and insert powders in hot oil and place it over the area, so that the stomach is treated with what goes to the pus inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is properly raised on the side where he sleeps, until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol ninth.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Regarding the restoration of fracture in the two lumbar vertebrae and the cervical region.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their tendons, as well as in the lumbar vertebrae.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens with someone else and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider that if their hands are already softened, become numb and dead and cannot be made stronger, extended, contracted, and when you force them against your own words or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain in those areas, then know that it is not healing, and during these times of symptoms it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel pain and constriction in those areas against your own words or pierce them, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the stomach heals with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similarities in the cervical vertebrae to this and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of him/her.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And when you see that they are already softened, it happens with those things that happen to the hands, and roughly when lying on their back, experiences windiness and loss of appetite according to their will, and some fractures lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot. Then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not bother in treating him/her.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May if no cause comes from those things, the cause is better and less severe.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for him is that you perform on cooling down the pus-filled blister that you place over the lumbar vertebra with heated oil, or with the steam of boiling water; apply heat to those wounds each day until the pus-filled blister cools.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place a plaster that soothes and remains in place, and press on it with strength; and command the stomach to take rest and peace, not to sleep where pain is found within until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that you rupture the bone or any cause already separated from it, then let's heal over the wound and remove that bone. And adjust the two lips of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and treat that with some kind of ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	May if it is broken in the tail of the bone, which is at the end of the penis, then let's insert your right hand's fingers into his anus and align the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for the second equation; and apply plaster and ash on him, if you need those, and press that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones inside him/her, then let's cut over that area, hold that, and treat the wound with the treatment that is followed until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capitol tenth.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Regarding the restoration of the elbow.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the elbows often break, and if they do break, then the fracture is simply communication at the ends of those areas and is inscribed along their length, declining inward; and it happens to the stomach pain in that area and a puncture, and the change becomes numb when there is a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration for him/her is that you extend your hand over it while it is above the fracture which is the shape of his/her elbow.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then let's align that according to what can be done with the equation equal within so that it matches its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May if the fracture is in the long or that has declined towards the parts left, then let's make the stomach lie on its belly so that you prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have leveled that, place plaster on them, and also place the stick or bone saw above that spot, and firmly press over it with your hand without fearing the piercing of a fracture or movement of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And level the cavity within which that constriction occurs according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his elbows or not to turn his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an abscess forms due to the cauterization, then stop extending him and restore him within where the abscess is cauterized, and place on that part which is affected according to its previous condition; and continue restoring him afterwards, strengthen that accordingly as before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the jaw or teeth are broken, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Capítulo xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	关于辅助骨折的恢复。
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori是指位于肩胛骨和头部之间的部分。
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	如果断裂了，那么对他的恢复方式有以下两种方法中的一个，你会使用中等大小的木棒按照这种方式：
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	两边有两根线，然后将它们悬挂在高处。
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	让病人躺在一张小床上；然后将他的断裂的臂部放在木棒上，直到它能够到达木棒中间的位置，那个位置具有与木棒曲线对应的弯曲。
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	然后在那个上面悬挂一个较重的物体，或者让助手将它移到之前指定的部分；然后医生检查他的手肘，在那里进行治疗，直到骨折能够按照原来的形状恢复。
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	另一种方法是让病人仰卧在自己的颈部，助手将手肘挂在一个绳索上；然后命令两个助手：其中一个是那个被治疗的人的手部上方的地方；另一个则是他脚下的位置；他们中的每一个都伸展到他们的部分。
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	如果你想让扩展更加有力，那么在手肘和骨折处加强力量，在另一根绳索上也这样做，并让两个助手的每一个都伸展到他们的部分。
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	所以，如果骨折靠近肌肉的末端，那么你应该将一半的绳索放在关节点上，并将另一部分放置在手肘处。
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	类似地，如果骨折靠近手肘，那么你应该将绳索放在那个位置，并且在那个手肘上。
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	平衡那个，并进行操作，直到它按照原样平衡并正确地应用为止。如果在没有形成烧伤脓肿的情况下发生这种情况，则加强那个位置。
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	如果形成了烧伤脓肿，那么在第七天时平滑那处的狭窄部位，并在第十五天时用未煮过的小草和油敷在那里，直到脓肿消失。然后加强那个区域。
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	强化那个部分的方法是在骨折处放置敷料，然后用新的布包裹在敷料上；接着调整手臂的位置以适应辅助装置，并将手张开放在自己的肌肉上。
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	然后固定布料并加强手肘与辅助装置之间的连接，以确保手臂处于与星星相同的位置。否则，可能会导致断裂的骨头受到任何不利的影响。
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	那么就使用星星吧。
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	这意味着在骨折处放置那个星星，使之比其他星星更靠前且更坚固；每个星星之间间隔与星星的宽度相同；所有方向上的星星长度则应根据断裂的位置加上三指的总和。
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	接着在提及第一章时描述的位置加强那些星星。
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	这意味着你的压力应该集中在骨折的位置，使其更加稳定。
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	并且当骨折完全愈合后，那里的压力会减少。
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	所以，如果你了解了星星和压力的位置，就像我们在恢复肢体到其原位置时所说的那样，在那个时候你就会这样去做。
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	如果你担心形成烧伤脓肿，那么在第7天时应按照我们所述的那样放松压力和星星的位置。
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	接着，在所有的方向上考虑绳索达3天，以防在压迫点或肿胀处出现不良反应；或者禁止食物直接接触肢体以避免因过量的压力引起的不适。然后根据我们所说的方式调整所有事物。
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	如果你确信不会发生任何因这种操作导致的问题，那么不要解开绑带，至少等待三天或者更久。
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	那么患者的背部应该躺在他的后背上，而他的手则放在他的腹部上。
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	然后在手肘上放满等量的羊毛垫，考虑到夜间或白天的任何时间，都不应该使断裂的肢体变形或溶解。或者直到该部分变得柔软，然后根据你的技艺调整所有这些。
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	然后按照我们之前安排的顺序调整食物，以使食物在开始加强时保持细小；然后继续增大对他的食物供给。
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	关于手肘和患者胸部的常规是，在40天内加强，然后放松并使用浸泡或涂抹药膏进行处理，这些药膏可以调整那些区域。
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is healing by friction, then you do not disturb that ligament and let the stars heal within days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a forearm fracture.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is made up of two bones which are called the radius and the ulna; among them, one is small, and it's called the wrist bone, while the other is large and it's placed after the small one when we say 'after the wrist'.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And in a mild fracture, only the larger bone breaks or even both bones break at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when only the smaller bone breaks above, then its restoration is mild and its healing is even milder.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when either of the bones below breaks, his arm fracture is bad and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse than that is when both bones break at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that breaks is the smaller radius above, then for the doctor, it's appropriate to restore him by slightly extending that area where it can be made equal.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if it is the larger bone that breaks, then apply a more forceful extension pressure.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken at once, then you should exert stronger traction force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And when you place your hand's figure, restore him and extend his arm over a cushion, with the wrist of his hand above each other parts above, rather than any other instructions. And let the ankle be below all others, and let the foot be at right angles to a sloping stool laid out.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place one cushion in front of him according to his height or position, so that the foot does not bear more work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then have another minister extend his arm from the side below towards his own hand or ligament, and another minister extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should equalize the bones within where it can reduce that according to the best figure that can be.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone are splints, then you should perfectly reduce all pieces to their place with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears in him a splinted separation that breaks the continuity and is not within your hope for his restoration, then you tend to him and hold it as per the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	And if the fracture is from a blow, I have already discussed this in this chapter alone, so take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if it happens that you develop an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then lay out a cloth with a wadded gauze made from burned oil and white wax, and place it in the middle between hardness and subtlety, and apply a firm cloth over that within a subtle constriction where the abscess can be drained; and then replace the gauze and place an adhesive plaster; and let this plaster be placed closer to and more firmly on that fracture.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of gauzes for the arm is found in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or both bones at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your constriction firmly and vigorously over the site of the fracture, and when more appropriate is the constriction towards each part above the fracture or towards the lower parts of him, place the constriction a little wetter than usual according to his previous memory at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that envelop the fracture should be soft and wet, not hard nor stiff, and the material with which they are strengthened should be midway between subtle and bulky, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and the ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there arises any cause for which correction is necessary, as when something happens to the member itself, then you should immerse the member in cold water until that inflammation subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member not be strained again until it has rested, and then return to the constriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the constriction has already been softened and the bone has already been set and looks like those, then correct all this with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess constriction; then you should let that soften slightly and allow it for several days until nutrition can flow towards it, and then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the foot there does not arise any cause of those that we have said, then you should let it be undisturbed for about 20 days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the hand of the foot be suspended by its strength in movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 40 days, or somewhat more gently in 28 days, and all of this depends on the qualities of completeness and the dispositions of strength.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a wrist fracture and finger fractures.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that there can be a bone fracture in the wrist and knuckles of fingers, but they do not suffer from broken bones alone.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when it comes to a wrist fracture or strain, you should let the foot remain hanging and in front of him laid out according to equality, and then place his hand on that stretched out.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones, the doctor equally matches them inside where they are connected by good bone growth.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then cover the place with plaster and stopper, if it does not lead to a cauterized boil; and place a piece of felt over the area according to its size, and you have already enveloped that in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the incision is in the internal parts inside the belly of the palm, then make a semblance of a hole in the linen, and command the patient to hold that on their slashed palm; keep it tightly held by linen.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the felt of flesh be on linen where it floats, so that the flesh is applied to the palm; hold that according to how you cover it.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the external parts, then cover by placing another felt and another piece of cloth from that part under the palm, so that the hand can be open and straight; and place the constriction, as if the hand turns between the fingers to the thumb.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if it happens that the fracture is in one of the joints of the fingers, then if it's the joint side, it should be matched according to how you cover it and place it tightly on the palm; if you wish, place a small strip vertically so that the fracture is elevated and not painful.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in that of the middle part, or on the index, or on the ring, or on the little finger, then it should be matched and placed on the relevant side; or they are all laid out sequentially, which is better; or place a small felt over that, as we have said about the joint.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and near that, the position of a cauterized boil and counterpose - during your operation - on what covers when any cause of those occurs, according to which is repeated the narrative about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Title XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the hand bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the wrist are broken and assessed according to their conversion into the part in front, and towards the top of the boil.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done so that the flesh is held over the fracture and other muscles around the fracture, and the patient lies on their belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the muscle according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it approaches the radius of the wrist, then let the muscle approach the ulnar side at the part of the thumb, so that the extension covers them, and other muscles around the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break approaches the ulnar side, then let the muscle be placed near the ulna, and have the extension at the parts left.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor matches the bones on both of their hands so that it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good union; then cover with plaster or constriction, if there is not any occurrence of a boil in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it happens that there is a boil in him, then you leave him for several days until the cauterized boil subsides, and then proceed with your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The constriction for him should be made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess from him; then wrap around the joint until it reaches the radius of the wrist.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the wrist and the joint near the ulnar side at the parts left, and extend the ends of the needle from the part above the boil to both sides, and then rotate around the joint and wrist until excess from the bandage is removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place felt on the wrist in the location of that fracture, and from those places place one piece of felt over the bone at the joint.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the gaps between the joint and wrist with many layers of bandages, so that the constriction can be凝结.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And start with a strong constriction in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the site of the fracture in the flesh, your constriction becomes smaller and more gentle and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend the ends of the needle to both parts where it reaches inside the chest cavity, and hold both ends of the other pieces of felt so that the flesh is not moved from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And let the constriction lie on that, so it is such that there is no corrosion or cauterized boil nor swelling in the limb and resembles those; if any cause of these occurs, then observe his state of illness, and correct whatever happens as closely as possible, according to what we have said about broken bones.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a piece of bone which fits, then let you match that according to what is possible for you; and if not, treat him with that from which the previous memory was preceded until he recovers.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some times this fracture of the wrist is treated differently than with his pieces of felt, as we have said in the assistant and for the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of him using such a method, it should not cause the patient to limp; and if restored alone, like when another joint is applied elsewhere, then it is necessary that he limps from which there is time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	Know that the thigh is strong for forty days or a few months, and all of this varies according to the diversity of the constitutions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the knee joint fracture.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that although a fracture of the knee joint is rare, it tends to occur in more pronounced twisting injuries.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	It may happen that such a fracture occurs; then it is simply a crack or strain in its parts, and this is either a minor injury or a major one, and the whole depends on the nature of the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is undertaken so that what is broken in its parts, within those mentioned, may be added and united according to the possibility for equilibrium and ease of manufacture.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply plaster and place over that round pillar, if you need it from that; and strengthen above with a compression as suits.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus with a pus evacuation or resembling those ones that oppose every incident according to what is suitable for it within which healing occurs.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the hip joint fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the hip joint there are two bones, of which one is thick and it is named by its name as "the hip"; and the other is thin and it is named easily.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to those of the species of fracture which occur in both bones of the arm, and thus restoration is made for it just like that of the arm equally, and the operation for it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken simultaneously, the hip turns in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if only the thinner bone is fractured, the hip turns towards the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, look for that knee, and it's among those causes not within your knowledge.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equilibrium according to that equalization as far as the limbs.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the hip is without major symptoms, that extension should be gentle and more mild, and please with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the hip there is some cause for operation about the arm, and that's when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation. Then you will take weights of sticks of foot which are placed under these causes which are paused in solies, and are made similarly from palm branches; move those to those with slight discomfort, and not the hands, and let their length be according to the length of the hip, and inside the arm, pause them.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap around each strip in two layers according to the length of it, and place one over the joint of the hip of one side and the other on the other side, and let them be inside the arm near the back part of the chest.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two stars in three locations of both extremities and at the middle one, where with this structure the hip is prevented from bending to the right or left side, it stays in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a brace of wood has been applied according to the length of the hip; and let the hip be paused in it so that it preserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially note this for fractures, and when you have properly healed it.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the hip and study it for the end of study, and keep it from pus or inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause among those happens, then pause yourself on it according to what you learn until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel and bones of the foot and fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A fracture of the entire heel doesn't occur; but some fractures do happen to the bones of the foot; and only few fractures occur in the fingers, and it doesn't happen to them except through violence during the months of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient lifts their foot onto prepared earth as if in bed.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which is elevated from those bones, and apply pressure, press, equalize them within which they turn in the places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply plaster and stop above it, and place a small table under the belly of the foot which has two cushioned heads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that on the foot with a descending structure, since you have enveloped it in cloths and other causes from which you need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as three or four days pass, then you will release the ligaments, which you will find the bones equalized, or if they are broken or dislocated, and in those operations it's thus how you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some fingers are broken, then restore those ones and equalize them as I have and recommended to you in the restoration of fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger with a star according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly closer than this. And then let the foot be on this table which has been recommended to you, and strengthen that with a descending compression.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if that which is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a star of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and standing on one of the table's head let the belly be through it for good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents that we have said; and beware of every event in this way.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the thigh bone and the shin bone, and of the ribcage in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is broken, then make that part bend at the crease, and somewhat incline it towards the division of two sides, and keep it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife raises the thigh bone to the hip, and has it positioned in the thigh bone as she wishes; and the woman is tilted forward, and the two sides of her small children are gradually raised, for all this happens as it should be before that part of the thigh bone is aligned as she wishes and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, ease her hip so that she can relieve herself, and after she has urinated, return it according to the manner in which you have mixed it at the beginning, and then return to her initial powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or about that time, until it is healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an egg shell and strengthen the back of her thigh with a thread; then insert the whole bladder into her thigh, and then blow into the tube so that the bladder inflates inside the thigh, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And fill it with her hip and leave it for several days as we have recommended, until she is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the shin bone in men or women is broken, then administer to its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended about the thigh bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight should not be concealed in these nearby fractures where few occur, especially regarding the one who has some study and understands this my free movement; for that fracture means to you in the major directions of mechanical flow during its restoration and constriction, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And in the ribcage when it is broken, take guard over her with caution, and place the ribcage there; then cover her with a cloth包裹, and wrap it around her, then leave her for three days or about that time, and she will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when they are under plaugue.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for you when it happens to you that you have a fracture under plaugue, especially if the bone is large such as the elbow bone or the adjutant bone, or similar ones, that you take care of and use bleeding tools immediately if the conditions for bleeding are suitable or testify so as we have said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plaugue is draining pus, then observe that you take care of it well enough so that you powderize over it until it becomes whitish, if no other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, do not prolong this action if there is no abscess formation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	And if there is an abscess caut, then you leave the restoration of her within the ninth day, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third day or by all three days, when you will have caused bad events.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	And if the broken bone is prominent over the exposed vein, then you must try to reduce it and equalize it with your own muscles as easily and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	And if extension is not at your disposal and the equality of her with your own muscles, then you reduce it with your own muscles as this tool; and this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits or eight, and its width according to the amount of the plaugue; thus, it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of them according to the amount that you need for this in treatment for all types of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and with little hardness so that you don't bend it, you apply pressure to it during the operation time.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have an acute extremity with a margin on her own extremities; and its strength is uniform throughout, and the most of her inside in the divisions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is her form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is named in Greek "labre volenz atelerem", thus it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And you should have her extremity resting on the elevated extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it into a groove until the bone returns and is equalized with some equality.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And thus try to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is delicate, and it does not take that tool for good access, then you must immerse her extremity into that bone where the instrument has power over this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then cut it with one of the scalpels which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way that is suitable for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then cut only what remains on the bone surface and those thin remnants.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and upon reduction she feels severe pain in her thigh, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do this so that you give her great strength to the thigh.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is completed and then you immerse a cloth in a dark astringent remedy, and particularly during summer, do not cover the wound with a bandage or any other source causing oil, for fear that it may cause infection and putrefaction.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And in the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone, apply plasters, and leave the wound uncovered so that you may cut it with a scalpel and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take all necessary care not to damage the wound on the fracture, as these are the methods that doctors use, and cause harm to their patients' limbs or lead to decay or corrosion of the bones, for healing is what you seek.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your constriction is slight, soft, different from the constriction of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those harmful accidents that we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, then do not cover it with pressure, but instead use hard bandages instead of plasters on that area, and support her there.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about one or two days have passed and healing begins in her, then you should remove the cloth that you had placed over that area earlier with oil. Then apply ointments; these are what we commonly use to treat wounds, such as tetrarhomachon and similar ones for that purpose.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should know that removing the bandage and consider the healing process every morning and evening until it is consolidated and sealed, then cover so that the limb is prepared in such a way that infection can easily spread from her to the parts left behind.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes several days and does not consolidate or detach from her with oil, then know that this is due to the small ones, you should cover as needed for the wound in anticipation.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small ones that are separate and fall out, those that do not separate from them and cause the limb to cause pain, perforate and allow you to insinuate those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound becomes black or white, it is inflammation, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then cover and allow to rest each one of those according to what you deem fit for her, as per the instructions preceding treatment in that chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you should consider the best position and have your presence for her: when the bone is broken, elevate the limb as if it were the bone of the thigh and assistant bones and similar ones to those of large limbs, and do not assume an injury for her, nor removal of the injury that might happen through this cause death; leave it there until it can settle, which will fall by itself after about 20 or 30 days. And then treat the wound if you see her, and if not, leave that area alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of necrosis that occurs in the aftermath of some fractures.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These wounds cause this necrosis in the aftermath of fracture healing, and especially near joints, causing her to distort the shape of the limb; and forcibly prohibit her from her natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the necrosis is recent and administer in that medicine that has astringent properties such as aloes, snails, look at them, squeeze them, crush them, similar ones; so take some or all of those, and apply them with oil to stop the bleeding, or with albumin of flour, or with vinegar, place that over the necrosis on a stopper, and tighten them around her for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction so that you do not remove it for several days; then remove that and apply another one, until the necrosis is softened; or strengthen over that sheet of lead, as lead has a property to soften everything that swells in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Or if the necrosis has already turned black and been removed, and there is a need to cut her gradually, then divide that by the most elevated part of her, and remove the excess or cut it with several razors until it softens; and treat that area until she heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On restoration of fractures when restored and how to subsequently handle the delicate limb without respecting its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and you are to handle the delicate limb subsequently, this should not be done unless for certain causes: among which one is the abundance of serum in the membrane and the accommodation made by her not according to what she needs; or due to excess of constriction in the membranes where nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb; or due to an excess of ointment applied; or due to excessive movement beyond its time; or due to weakness throughout the patient's body and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of this involves reducing her to thinness and make her body soft where her strength is multiplied in her; give her baths; and use massage and joy for her.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place honey on the limb, because the honey attracts her body's nutrition, or continue to apply her with strong water, until her nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the healing of bones, they are restored in a tortuous manner and prohibit the operation on them for what covers.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the already restored member near its healing from tortuosity and eminence in the broken bone and joint, and that is how you preserve the form of the member, however, the member does not prohibit its natural operation. Therefore, do not receive the word of him who considers that part of his body was made of a new broken bone.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	May already be attributed to obstinate surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly disapproved leading to great fear of the sign which makes one mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If there is a limpness and joint pain recently, then receive that they be immersed in water of extreme heat where herbs are cooked, such as haws and berries of the same kind; and it should be done to them a plaster in the form of a mollification plaster as well as with garlic well prepared; or that the mucilage from the seeds of the same kind is taken and it is covered with goose grease or with oil of camphor, and then it should be applied with that; or that fatty figs are used and they are stuffed with wax of bees, and similar to those medicines known as consolidating.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times it is dissolved by frequent light rubbing on the most moist parts, and it should be administered movement of the limb in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If tortuosity has already gone ahead and been made strong, turning into pus and requiring treatment with iron for it, then receive that the pus be above the wound and its continuity of bone be dissolved, and let iron be applied to what is superfluous of the joint from that part to the bone using fine incision tools, and its administration should be facilitated in that through diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Section Title: XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	Regarding speech on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of his joints in a location, preventing movement and causing the figure of the limb to be distorted, bringing pain and major injuries upon the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when dislocation occurs, immediately seek to reduce it, and do not delay in reducing it; for if it is delayed, the joint becomes stuck and stiffens under that, making it difficult to perform the reduction of dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And do not allow it to be overly restricted or stretched during the process of reduction, as tense and painful contractions are caused by this.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, do it by the armpit gait of the patient, and let them rest in that place to allow the swelling to settle; and let the limb be soaked in hot water and oil, and let it be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And each limb should be treated with that which will bring back its memory to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already and ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fractures; from the part of the body, up to the part below it.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Section Title: XXIV
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the jawbone below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So if the two jawbones are dislocated but not ruptured; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: they are slightly displaced from their places by a little movement and are made milder. Or they are completely dislocated and completed, wherein they are made milder in the area between where saliva escapes from the patient's mouth and cannot be contained, nor can she close her mouth; and her tongue is enveloped in that word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of him/her is slight, then it returns to its major positions due to a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and thorough, then receive that its reduction be administered gently, and do not delay it in entirety.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And that the minister have the head of the patient, and let the doctor insert his/her one hand in the space of one part's jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in one part; or let him/she insert both hands at once, if the dislocation affects two parts, and the other instructions from this should be outside those with which it agrees; and command the patient to stop moving his/her jaws and let them move off in every direction; and the doctor aligns the jawbone and pushes the jaw back into its proper place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of him/her is difficult, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer diaphoresis with hot water and oil, during which a gentle reduction of both is performed without delaying the complete reduction of both as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And once they have returned and been aligned, when the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place those powdered drap polvises on it with cerotic, and let it be done with wax and oil rubbed; and let them rest easily with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his/her back, with their head between two pillows, so that it does not twist to either side; and do not force him/her to eat any particular food; have his/her food be forbidden for lion-like eating, until when the pains are softened and the jaws are numb, then allow him/her what he/she wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be given with ease, and you mustn't work over the opening of the mouth during eating and drinking and rest, until the jaw is treated and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws within an hour and they do not transform into their usual positions, then fevers and frequent diarrhea occur, and severely irritate the patient's stomach, causing severe diarrhea that is purely watery.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, then you know it's a loss; and if someone experiences this, they will die within three days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On reducing the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated inside the joint due to its continuity with the bone; sometimes it gets dislocated outwardly, and this is reported by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then pinch the spot with your palm with strong pinching, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place plaster and powder over that, strengthen that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that which is continuous with it not be dislocated in any day; then confirm that it should be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place plaster and powder over that area, apply bandages, and instruct the patient to remain in bed and rest until they recover.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this treatment, reduce the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You will know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the part of the tendon to the part below.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this occurs forcefully; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is mainly dislocated and situated outside in the parts below of the tendon, especially in those where the muscles are few, slightly dislocate; more in those with abundant muscles, it is located outside with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And severely to some people, impact or injury occurs, and the patient's muscle becomes inflamed with a boil-like condition, it is moved by this so that it is already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	So confirm this within you while you are well-prepared for him, and then proceed with his treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And when you know the dislocation of him, it is at the parts below of the tendon; so distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which you find among those with manifest diversity; you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and below the tendon you touch that part of the muscle like a hound's nose, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor even that area with all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the bone or on it, then you will find distinct touchability, and it is not concealed.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a slight reduction is made when the patient is young and the muscle is still fresh.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand above to the patient's head; then he places your hands below the tendon of his muscle, and lifts the joint with strength towards its place; the minister raises his hand of the patient, extends it downwards; then he pauses it so that it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if it does not return for what we have said, and is due to the nature of the dislocation, then wait several days, confirm that the patient should be bathed in hot water and given a poultice that soothes and heals as if they were herb baths, fennel, and mint in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should lie on their back and be paused with the tendon of him waiting for warm compresses that are equal between lightness and tension, and then the doctor places his hand on the spot, raises the head of the muscle vertically, pulls the hand of the patient so that it does not hurt at the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient in such a way that it does not hurt at the parts below, when that returns to its place almost immediately.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, stands on the side of that joint, inserts his muscle below the tendon of the patient and raises the tendon above him while the patient hangs in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is slighter, then confirm that another cause should be suspended, because heavily making that one, causing the dislocation to return immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced smoothly according to another manner: and that you place in the ground a long pole whose tip has a rounded shape like a mortar's handle, not too thick or thin, and then pause him over the tip of the pole; so that the sheets are placed on top of the tip of the pole, the patient standing according to the length of the pole, and then extend his hand at the parts below from the other side; and stretch the body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce you by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a rod of such length as is in the span of two arms, and its width shall be four digits, and the thickness thereof should be rough as on the nipple according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And above the head, cover with lion's skin so that the rod does not harm the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place your hand or the arm under the rod within the parts, and lay the rod on the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm on a ladder according to its width, and the hand is extended within the parts, and the other foot hangs from the other side, where the joint is located.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment for you is completed according to any method that is possible, then take and place a piece of lanolin wool equal in quantity on your nipple; and prepare plaster made from moli powder and egg white over all the muscle, so as it is mixed above, and reinforce your nipple with strictness; and the bandage should be rotated over the plaster, and your hand should be connected to your neck, and left like that, and your hand should not be irritated by your hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is to be noted that the food for the patient should be little, within which the member is comforted, which is easier to his recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more around seven or five days and exercise; and therefore if it is closed and not softened, then he/she is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moist humors that affect it or for another reason, then take note that in that case, three types of cautery should be administered, as stated in the section on cautery in the title.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage and the strictness are reduced over some wounds, but not closed and hard, that cannot lift that arm up to his parts anymore, then you have noticed that your nerves which are at the head of the muscle are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	And from the dislocation of that which is caused by the foot or the breast or behind parts, the reduction is done with pressure and extension on his hands, so as to return.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another tightness should be applied in that area, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the recovery is severe in the member and late for his/her movement, then the patient should take hot baths until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Title: XXVII
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it's dislocated in all directions, especially in front of and behind; the dislocation is not hidden from you even if you feel or touch it according to whatever figure it has been dislocated. When adjusting the dislocated elbow, it becomes clearly stated for you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch its muscle at all.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And take care of your elbows, and reduce the dislocation immediately before it goes to the point where the gout appears; if it reaches the gout point, reducing him becomes difficult, and he is not fully healed. Especially when it's in the behind parts, which is worse than all other types of dislocations and causes more pain; hot baths turn deadly to that situation.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of you, when that is possible to reduce, should have your hand extended between two arms, and his arm should be expanded, and the doctor's hands are on the elbow and under him/her, and he/she pushes the joint with the heels of his/her hands or at the base of his/her palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in front of parts, then it returns like this: bend your hand towards his/her hand, hitting the elbow at the base of his/her palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers should extend the arm, and have that tension by themselves without being able to resist against the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm in all parts, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around his/her hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his/her hand, anoint that with some oil so as to help those causes which aid in the lubrication of the joint making it easier; and then he/she pushes the joint firmly until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And when the reduction of you becomes that it is placed on that plaster in which there is stability and movement with egg white, and it is tightened with a gentle bind, and the arm is hung from the neck, and left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be released; and if the joint has formed in its place, you release his/her bandage and leave him/her alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strong, then apply the plaster and bandage, let that rest for several days until it becomes stronger; then release that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if there is a tendency towards gravity during the joint reduction, and his position is in movement, then apply moistening in the bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it gets lubricated; or place yourself on top of the joint, like a pad of soft skin; then tie that up, and let that rest over the bone for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And hold that, then put it in the bath; and when wet, then rub the joint with an early friction, and place yourself over that gently, like a fleshy pad, once, and then again, and the third time.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already been transmitted within the bowels of the body, inside which it is confined.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place yourself over that wet and scraped cow's hole with strength on it; and do this several times, until that becomes moist again and returns to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of shoulder joint dislocation, it is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder joint sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy. However, for other joints, it's better to act quickly in reducing them when they are dislocated before the wound forms or a boil appears.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of shoulder dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the patient on a table and extend the arm of the person. The surgeon places his hand or palm over the edge of the joint, then pushes that until it returns to its location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it's important to consider if the palm has already reached into the abdomen of the hand. In that case, the patient should place both hands on a table and have them extended and reduced; and if the dislocation occurred before, then the position of the hand is inherently on the table, so that the surgeon's hand falls onto that edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that's good; and if not, then strengthen that with moistening around the boil and let that be; and don't repeat this procedure, for if you don't, you won't endure nor manage the reduction of it because what passes into it are days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint follows its own curvature; and do not ask the patient for any cause, since his arm has been softened and cannot endure any cause; then you should know that the nerves are torn or cut off, and if this is the case within it, then you should strengthen it with a cautery before and fortify whatever reason you give him.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the boil has returned, then place yourself over the bandage which we have re-taken, and let it rest and be strengthened for five days; then release that and let it rest, and exercise the arm of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if the movement of it remains and causes trouble in it, then moisten that with hot water and apply friction several times, until it gets lubricated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of finger dislocation.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	A few times, you may dislocate the fingers in every direction.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger is dislocated towards the back of the hand or into it, then fix that finger and push its dislocation with your fingers until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And hold the head of the finger, then suspend that from the part where it is dislocated, and let that be for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend it until its rightness is equal to that of its day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it's morning, let that proceed according to that narrative, and don't cease dislocating that during the day and exercise with movement, and let that be at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do as if this were the case, if it is dislocated in the hand's belly, then let that be towards that part and perform your first operation on that, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of shoulder joint dislocation.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to any of the shoulder or neck joints in a complete dislocation, and we reinforce the muscles around that location, then there is no treatment for this, as death occurs to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And as a sign of this, is that the digestion of the patient goes outside against his will, and he cannot hold it; several times, soften some limbs or both sides of him or his arms, or one of those. Or reinforce a muscle in its place, and several times strengthen that and make removals of these to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And once it's been strengthened behind those parts, it is named gelsemiotismus.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of it is that you should then consider if gelsemiotismus occurs in childhood; and there is no cure for this nor complete healing.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	And for those that occur due to trauma or impact or similar in those cases, the ancients have said that they discuss treatment with overly long speeches, of which this returns to profitability; but I have abbreviated from that on account of my closeness to your understanding and exposition, to which I have laid out and structured this using various tools from which I will show you this and expand upon that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that when jelly-like substance occurs in the feet from the front part, it is neither an illness nor cure for that; similarly, when it happens on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only that which occurs in the feet specifically under this is cured, as I have prescribed.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And let the patient lie on his face on a hard surface about as close to the wall as possible, and let him spread himself out completely wetting it so that he doesn't slip on the feet.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And put a straight staff upright, placed in the ground at the end of the bed near the head of the patient, and another stick at the other end of the bed under the feet of the patient.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the attendant holds the staff, and does not fix it in a hole; and another attendant holds the other according to that manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the patient and make the ligaments tight; extend the end of the ligament to the staff which should be under his head, and tie that on him; and strengthen the other band on the buttocks and knees of the patient, and place those at his back; and adjust all the bands and tie those on the second staff which should be under his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the attendant extends the band to the junction of the staff, and do not have both poles and the bands of their places in which they are placed fixed too tightly, but rather not as tight as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength in which it returns, or he places one on that table, and make him adjust under the table with his feet in which it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	May it be that if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three spans, and dig into the wall as we have said that there is a place for the patient between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet at the other end, and he stretches between so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open both sides which are twisted under the hand; and what you should do is put the head of the patient on the ground with his back facing the end of two sticks in front of him, the length of which is about one span. And place his head at the end of the bed on two sticks as well, the distance between them being a span each. And ensure that the length between every stick is about one span, and have it done so that you pull out all sides under the ground so they are not disturbed.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And put another stick to support the side, and it should twist in both turns of each stick.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a turn where the stick forms, whose length is about one span under which it twists; and in the other two sticks it's similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And adjust the bands you've tightened in the feet of the patient under that turn which should be behind his head, and the bands you've tightened on his thighs under that one which should be under his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And for each side, you should have one attendant to twist that side with his hand, and the doctor adjusts the spine according to what we've said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how the twist works:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And here is how to do it once the spine has returned and the place has been adjusted: take beaten earth mixed with goose fat and stop; then put that on the beaten earth on a table whose width is about three inches or roughly those sizes, and the length should match the size of the jelly-like substance, and over the junction of the spine there.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And next, use the band we have said, let the patient take in subtle nourishment so that they are cured.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any danger at the end of recovery in the place, then take care to administer medicines that purify and clean during the long period before the table is removed, as we have recommended; and already an antimony leaf has been administered in that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes there are dangers at the end of the spine on both sides due to dislocation; and that's the place which has already undergone such danger so that you should not take any precautions for him with this medicine, which would cause his death to occur.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capítulo XXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a hernia that has been dislocated.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the pubis and the joint of the muscle should not be subject to dislocation alone, but it does not happen in those places as what happens to other joints with small movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the pubis is dislocated in four ways, which are: it is dislocated internally or externally, or forwardly or backwardly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is more commonly dislocated internally, with less often occurring externally or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	A sign of dislocation internally is this: when you adjust the healthy leg on the patient's body, it becomes longer than normal; the thigh is more prominent than that of a healthy person. The patient cannot bend their knee properly and has to hold their leg in a bent position, so that their buttock protrudes here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation happens is outside the parts, it's that his accidents are against this incident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation happens in front is that when his hernia expands with a fullness, but otherwise does not bend that pain which is during his defecation; and if it continues to increase beyond this dislocation in front; and his urine is retained and his swelling is stopped, you should consider his mobility on the sole.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation happens at the rear is that it does not extend his defecation, nor can he bend what bends in front that it bends swelling, and his hernia is much shorter than the other, and his swelling is relieved, and the tip of the thigh is below this location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The possible reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and long-lasting, that it has reached this level where you apply the reduction to him according to his position, then not in all; and therefore do not assume any suspicion in that case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must take this to turn the joint back and extend it towards the inside parts and the outside parts, and move it to the right and left, wherever its natural position returns and there is no need for another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it doesn't return in this manner, then you must prepare to exert force and extend the patient's hernia from its deeper location, or at their chest, or over that which is attached above the hernia; and another assistant should spread his hand upwards towards the buttocks so that he can place their hands under the buttocks. And firmly grip the center of the thigh with your right hand, and have another assistant hold the end of the ligament gently.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is extension of him or from the inside towards swelling at the part of the neck, or from the front to the part behind, or from the rear to the second part.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it is the extension of all in a single action that the patient should be elevated from his chest to the ground and dangles freely.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and otherwise, then for each type of its own treatment, it is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of your own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is inside, you must have the patient recline on his side; and then place the ligaments over the center of the thigh in that spot which lies between the tip of the thigh and the spot where swelling occurs. And extend the ligament from its lower end towards the farthest part of the neck region to the other part of the neck.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another assistant should firmly grasp his arms, tighten the large area of the thigh below and extend towards the outside parts by vigorous extension, until it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type requires much less treatment for reducing this member compared to the other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if you are excused and do not follow the treatment for this type of cure completely, then let both feet of the patient be held at once by strong but gentle hands, on both thighs and both buttocks.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each foot according to the quantity of four fingers, and let the thigh be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And have the patient's thigh hanging on top of the armrest, and upright; and let the length of the ground be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong youth to minimize the tip of the thigh, and have him hang from the patient with another youth, and let the other youth pull the thing with maximum strength until the joint returns to its place at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the self-reduction, when dislocation is outside the part, it's that you should push the thigh forward according to what we have recommended during the preparation; and strengthen the ligament over the thigh properly and over its feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And have two armrests placed, one under the patient's foot, and the other on top; and have two armrests adjusted in the middle of the buttocks covered with damp cloth, so that the thigh is not wet by the armrest being between his thighs; for you should extend the arms to the outside parts without it being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each assistant should spread out according to his own part, the doctor with his hand manages the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if you follow the reversal, it will be greatly beneficial; and otherwise, pause on that diligently and do it as we said during preparation for that adjustment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And have the patient lie down on his side calmly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the parts in front, then let the thigh be extended slightly, and as per this medium account about the body; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's lower thigh, and applies force with his other hand, and through that pressure he holds it while extending to the outside parts leaving the part of the rear.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is behind the parts, then it's necessary that the patient be laid on their back and elevated above the ground; also, they should be placed on a hard surface so that their abdomen protrudes due to dislocation when their width is dislocated outwardly, as we explained about laying them on two widths; and they are on their face and ribs extend, according to what we said, almost without error.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it's necessary that compression be applied onto the table over the area where the joint is protruding.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, once the reduction is completed as specified - and you don't see any sign of reduction in them, meaning that you should extend their thighs, then when you equalize those movements and they straighten their leg by extending their thigh and spreading out their foot, if you know how to move according to what has been reduced - then you adjust the two parts and apply poultice, stretching it over the body so that no part is neglected; and secure the patient in bed for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then gently massage the muscle and poultice, and compare one leg against the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And when you see that they are equal in appearance, then you know that the dislocation has been corrected, and then let the leg go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of relaxation, then return and treat that area with a poultice, stretch it according to your initial position, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then gently move that area, making the patient walk on both legs for several days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outwardly from the parts, inwardly towards the parts, and outwardly more to the parts behind. It is not dislocated forward of the parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is when you command the leg to apply its thigh against the hip; then you know that the shoulder has been dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the leg straighten outwardly, so that it can extend its thigh if possible on this; attach your two hands to their face and place your foot between your hands; then place the shoulder against your palms, hold them together with strength over the dislocated shoulder, and another serves to extend their leg when the shoulder returns to its position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of successful restoration is when their thigh sticks to the hip and remains comfortably elevated.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a poultice and make the thigh stick to the hip, and repeatedly adjust those areas for three or four days on one part, and then gently massage them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the leg to walk for a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	And if the reduction of your leg is justified, then apply strong extension to the muscles as described in the preceding narrative about hip treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of shoulder joint dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The shoulder joint can sometimes be displaced due to minor trauma, and in other instances it occurs with the full range of motion. The displacement can happen inwardly towards the parts or outwardly away from them.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder joint displacement is that you move your arm outwardly towards the part where it has been displaced.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for correcting minor displacements is relatively easy and involves extending the arm with ease towards the body, making sure that it becomes equal in position until it returns to its correct location.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In treating when it is displaced with the full range of motion, you should make the leg straight and have one assistant hold firmly and strongly from behind the leg at its midsection.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the back of the upper leg, and with your left hand at the lower part of the leg near the knee.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand across two points, and also extend it with your left. And push the feet of the leg from the right under the thigh as far as possible.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do these two points as we have discussed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the feet towards the thigh along the third point, and you are at the knee.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If you return in one way or two according to this manner, and if the pain is equal on both sides, it's good; and otherwise, then modify the operation, until it works when he returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are prohibited from returning him as we have advised, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a thick cloth under them, and put it between their thighs. Then wrap a sheet around the patient to prevent the hernia from slipping down.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And direct the minister to hold his thighs, and another minister to extend his feet either over or under the chest; and extend each minister against the extension of their side, and the cloth should remain between the thighs of the patient while holding him, so that the body does not slip towards the sides beyond its own extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And direct the doctor to reposition the joint near their own feet, while another minister holds the healthy thigh in place, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you have been informed about his health in the return, then stop with plastering and strengthen that firmly, and place the foot under tension against the chest.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And when you fear or protect from the nerves that are behind over the heel, so that the muscle on it is not vigorous and injures him strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And direct him to rest for two or three days; and if the muscle has softened, extend it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or fourth day, have him loosen up, and prohibit the patient from walking for another ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is forced to go in front of that space, there's not enough security that the dislocation will not dissolve and decay on him, and what does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that he gets a carbuncle, then remember in the distribution of his treatment what we have explained in our narrative, in another place of healing and application, until it is cured.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capital: 34
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation in the fingers of the foot.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Make sure that the one who is dislocated has slightly extended his treatment area; and what is not difficult, in advance it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the foot, then make sure that you have the patient lie on their foot over a similar location on the ground or on a table, and stay like they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And direct you to stand on your foot, and place your hand over the area where you are touching the joints, and directly push it against your foot with force so that it returns, and see that it is already aligned and does not appear in the touched area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And direct you to place the belly of your foot on a table that accommodates your whole foot, which has two ends, and direct you to strengthen it with proper structure and strength for three days; and direct him to loosen up and have rest from walking for a few more days, until it is strengthened and its functionality is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital: 35
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Regarding the different types of dislocation that can occur on a joint or fracture, or at any time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those happens, and you apply yourself to its treatment and restoring him, many deaths succeed it.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And so do not presume on his treatment, but the one who is skilled in that art, with long use, merciful and compassionate; be late, not impulsive or presumptuous; he should use only medicines that can cure carbuncles alone, and leave the patient to divine judgment, rather than to anyone you hope for salvation from disaster, towards alleviation of illness, and in which you have any hopes.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to immediately make the reduction for him during the onset of treatment, before a carbuncle appears.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we want, then administer treatment that can cure carbuncles and treat the injury with what suits him from the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation occurs with a fracture and it happens in the separated bones, then you perform their setting, and do what we have said about treating simple injuries of that which was followed up on those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And follow and avoid according to your skill the interior of the medicine in the ways of fear as you have been guided by my preaching; what is better for you is to trust your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more health for your true self will be seen those in your own time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	And thus conclude the words of Al-Bu'ardi, perfectly from which God may not be praised enough.
Amen.	Amen.
