Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Actually, this text seems to be written in a language that resembles a combination of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The guessed translation is:
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, I have now completed this book, which is the latest of the science of medicine, for the completion of which I have placed my trust in you, and for your exposure, and for your affirmations, it is to me that I must explain that I have composed this treatise for you, which is part of my art, that is, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For our time and region, surgery is a perilous art, so that its science is almost lost; and its vestiges are only a few short descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which change everything and remove the greatest part of the errors and hesitation that were previously in them, since they clarify the understanding of the art and extend its force and power
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is evident to me that I have composed this treatise in such a way as to follow the order of the exposition and the declaration, and to abbreviate; and in order that it should follow the forms of the instruments of cautery and other instruments of the work as well as for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of the matter which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The greatest cause why no wise man in our time can perform a perfect operation with his hand in this our age, is that the art of medicine is long, and that it covers a wide range of actors, since it includes the exercise of the science of anatomy, in which Gualius excelled, knowing how to manage the limbs and their forms, and how to join and separate them; and to have knowledge of bones, nerves, and vessels, and their number, and their extraction; and of the pulse veins and the location of their insertions.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And as Hippocrates said, “I have no name,” for in small works I have no name, and in the art of the hand I have no name.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Indeed, as it has already been said at the beginning of this book, whoever is not learned in anatomy will fall into error, and will cause the death of men, for I have seen many of these, since they are formed in this science and depart from this science and these experiments
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish doctor who, being unskilled, has incised an abscess of the scrotum in the groin of a woman, and has cut some veins of the groin so that the woman died between her legs.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who thought that he could extract a stone from a man’s bladder which had been present in his belly, and the stone was large, and he brought it to him and cut that stone out with a piece of the vein, so that the man died three days later
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already mentioned this, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and the condition of the patient I knew that he would die
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another doctor who took money from a duke from our land for surgery, and he was indebted to a black slave who was his servant, and he fractured the thigh of the slave, and in his ignorance prepared the doctor to cut the fracture, above the wound, with sponges and bandages with great tension, and he did not allow the wound to breathe air
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And thus I forbade him according to his desires, and I rebuked him, and I left him for several days and commanded that he be taken away; and thus the thigh was left without any dressing, and the patient died of sepsis
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I went to appeal to him, and I found that he had taken off the bandage, and there was peace and quiet and an end to his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed corruption had already begun in the limb, for I was unable to restrain it, and I did not cease to circulate corruption in the limb until the patient was in danger of death
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who performed an operation on a cancerous abscess, and caused ulcers immediately in several days, so that the malice of the disease increased with the master of the disease.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that black bile is pure melancholy humor, and it does not suffice to overcome it with all your might, but that you must take care of the limb in which the disease is to be treated so that it is a host to all things
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, son, it is necessary for you that the art of the hand be divided into two divisions: that is, in the art which is associated with health, and in the art which is perilous in the greatest precautions
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already spoken of this in all places of this book concerning the art in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary for you to guard against these things and to leave them behind, so that the fools do not find fault with you or reproach you
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take up the sacred arms in request for God's help, and the sacred sick in your care with charity and compassion.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Use the best way possible for God's grace to save and praise, lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and take up the sacred arms of those things that you fear, so that your salvation may rest in your faith and in your name, for it is your duty to return to your glory, and more so in heaven and on earth among the saints.</end_of_turn>
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Indeed we have already spoken in several places about this matter:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“There is no medicine for a bad disease, for so the learned doctors will not be called liars”.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already had to write this book according to three chapters.</end_of_turn>
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of all the first part.</end_of_turn>
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the head downwards, concerning the forms of instruments and the preparations of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.</end_of_turn
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.</end_of_turn
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning swelling and perforation, and windings, and plagues, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters, all categorized and ordered according to the forms of instruments.</end_of_turn
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.</end_of_turn
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, and treatment of twists and similar matters; ordered from the head downwards, and concerning the forms of instruments.</end_of_turn
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and acute medicine and reminder of the operation.</end_of_turn
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that which the treatise of all the book begins.</end_of_turn
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Since I have said what is the quality of the judgment of that cautery and its documents, and in what case it is prohibited to cauterize.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the judgment of the cautery and its documents is a long and profound one, subtle for science, and a secret hidden; and already many learned men have spoken of it, and they disagree with each other, and to me it seems that a little of their sermons is enough, fearing an extension.</end_of_turn
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore I say that cautery conforms to all universal completion except for two completions, which are caudal completions of its matter.</end_of_turn
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the caudal and dry completion of the matter there will be disagreement; for some say that cautery is useful in that, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not convenient in the disease because of its quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the disease be dry and cold with that which is cauterized and dry, because it is healed.</end_of_turn
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say that those who say the opposite, that for cautery is useful in every cold and dry disease that occurs in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man with the humidity of his members to the completion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say concerning this sermon that I have already experienced this several times.</end_of_turn
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not say that everything that has been said about cautery in this chapter should be abandoned and forgotten, because it has been exercised and practiced in many other chapters, and because you must know the diversity of the qualities of men and the disposition of diseases in their own places, and the causes of these, and their accidents, and the space of time of these.</end_of_turn
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other completions it is not about you to fear, and especially in cold and humid diseases, for already all doctors agree on that, and they do not disagree in the usefulness of cautery in those.</end_of_turn
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that the secret of the treatment of cautery with fire and the goodness of it, is about cautery with acute medicine, for the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized, and does not notice the other member adjacent to it except for a small document.</end_of_turn
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	For the action of acute medicine reaches only that part of the member where it is applied, and does not cause any great change in the member that is being healed, which is of great benefit in the member that has a difficult healing.</end_of_turn
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	For the fire, by its smallness and its goodness, does nothing else except superfluous. And it is known to us by experiment and by the length of our service in the art concerning the truth of the causes; and for this reason I am excused for the length of this sermon, for it is not fitting for me to reveal this secret of yours concerning fire to anyone, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and the expulsion of its seed, which is philosophical and has been demonstrated, is sufficient in the former parts of this book.</end_of_turn
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Wise son, children, that they disagree in the time when it is convenient to make incisions and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that incisions are convenient at all times, so that it does not harm at the time of an accident when it is immersed in the benefit of that which makes the incision, more so if the incision is for pain or necessary pain, strong and painful, which do not suffer from delay so that it is feared from those who come with malice, which is greater than a small entering for the time.</end_of_turn>
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And I say that we will not stay in other matters, or children, that it does not please but the vulgar people and foolish doctors, so that at that disease that is cured by incision is not ridiculous at all times, and to pause that consequence.</end_of_turn>
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not less that they say, for incision is nothing but in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of these pains.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	More indeed incision exceeds medicine by request for the value and virtue of its operation and greatness of the Lord's mercy.</end_of_turn>
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that your disease will return at some time of the day, according to the composition of the disease and the location of the disease, and the virtue of them, and what is prepared in the body from the collection of superfluities in it, and what is obtained in it from the acquisition in food and the like of those causes; but if the disease in which the incision is administered is a subtle disease of a few superfluities and humors, as for example an incision for pain, and the like of that, it is possible that in it that pain will not return, even though it is done in small doses.</end_of_turn
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it may be said vulgarly that incision is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a treacherous saying, not to which I agree, for I believe that it is not a cure that improves upon medicine or any other cause except incision itself.</end_of_turn
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is on the contrary of this; and the understanding that incision is the last remedy of medicine is true only when they administer the methods of treatment in certain diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and in the end of the cause they administer manes of incision, and they take advantage of that.</end_of_turn
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And indeed it is sixteen hours since I said that incision is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the vulgar people and fools of the doctors have.</end_of_turn
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	I say to them the ancients that incision with gold is better than incision with iron, and I do not say this except for the equality of gold and the fineness of its substance.</end_of_turn
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	I say that the place of incision does not make a madman, as it is not absolutely true, for I have already seen that it does not make much difference whether it is done with gold or with iron, since in both cases the other parts suffer in the same way; however, incision with gold is better than incision with iron, as they say; but indeed when you make an incision with fire with gold, it is not your will that determines the degree of the fire, for it is ignited according to the quantity you wish for the brilliance of the gold, and you must prepare to receive the heat; and if you adjust over it with fire, the gold is consumed by the fire, and in the fire some scales are left behind because the artificer cuts for the occupation of that.</end_of_turn
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason incision with iron must be performed more gently and cautiously in relation to the rectification of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on incision according to chapters, and I have ordered those from the head downwards, so that I may satisfy those who demand from me what they wish.</end_of_turn>
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	From the incision of the head for cold and humidity.</end_of_turn>
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to cold and humidity the accidental service of the things from which these two causes arise, so it is the cause of soda and multiple flow of nervous humor, swelling of the belly, of the head to the feet and of the armpits fluid, and multiple sleep, and toothache and headache, and universally of any disease that comes from cold, even as paralysis, tetanus and apoplexy, and it is similar in these diseases.</end_of_turn
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The way of this cauterization is this, that first of all it commands the patient to be evacuated with medical laxatives the head moderately modified, for three or four nights, according as you exceed the virtue of the disease and the age and custom of it.</end_of_turn
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And I command him to shave the hair of the head with a razor, and I make him do that between your thighs on a fallen bench and that you place your hand over your feet.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And immediately stop the progression of your palm towards the root of your nose between your eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the pain in the limb is severe, the doctor must touch the affected area with the cautery to make an incision. This is the form of the olive oil that the physician must use for this purpose:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And immediately stop that above the joint that is being tormented, in such a way that it descends, so that your hand is slightly constricted, and you rotate that
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then gently lift your hand slightly and support the limb, and if you see already some quantity of blood escaping, as much as the quantity of barley grains, then elevate your hand, and if you do not turn your hand towards that area, towards the other side, if it is cold, stay there until it has dried out as much as I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a little salt and dissolve it on the limb and leave it on for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And immediately stop over the knee bent in the border and leave it on until the burn of the fire is destroyed
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the limb until it is healed with four medicines.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And I have already said that when the plague remains open, take two measures: for it is better and more useful
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And I say to you that the bone must be cauterized until the bone itself, and that it must be held until no part of the substance of the bone is left.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And immediately put on that which is close to the bone, and immediately cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And I say that it must be cauterized towards the heel, so that when it is burned in the bone it will break, rather than that the bone breaks from the heat of the cautery. This is the form of small alphecation:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that limb the vapor of the head escapes.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the plague remains open for a long time, and immediately cure it when it is solidified
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two methods of cautery in all my life, except in fools for fear; and leave that, you must know, is better for health than to burn, because the head is developed by the solution of continuity of the limbs as we have testified in other members, and more especially when the head of the disease is of cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first method of cautery is better and more useful for you; and from that I have seen and from this work I know that it is healthier.
Capitol segon.	End of document.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain and that which is in the disease is prolonged, and you use cloths and cushions and caps and plasters and mustard and vinegar and garlic and barley and alum and others, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that accounts for it and does not profit from it for any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the disease is of strong constitution in its nature; and it is not cold or otherwise finds little heat, then you should cauterize with another cautery leaving a little space.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And immediately cauterize that on the heel of the foot with the cautery until the bone is split
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and uncover from the bone the quantity that we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery in the posterior part of the head in the area where it is affected by wind, — and that is the area where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And take your hand away in support, and do not uncover the bone, for the disease because of that will find great pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I say this cautery in this place, because it covers that with which I cauterize the toes and the occiput is more subtle than that with which I cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is its form
Capitol ters.	End of document
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cautery of ancient emigration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When inside the head there is soft pain, or widespread pain within the heel, evacuate immediately with medicines the head with its monifications, and administer the other treatment which I have mentioned in the preceding sections of diseases; and all this without profit, for the cautery in this case is done in two ways: either with acute medications that burn, or with the cautery
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Better is the cautery with medications that burn than to take a dose of alum, to scald it and remove the extremities of both heads
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then prick the area of pain in the temple with a lancet as far as it goes without showing the cord, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then keep pressure on it for a while to relieve the pain, and leave it for three hours; then remove the dressing and take off the bandage, and leave the wound covered for two or three days, and keep your hand over it until the pain subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it is healed
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, know that there are many medicines that can combat these, which I have written about in the treatise on medicinal treatments
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be carried out according to this manner: fire for cautery of this kind: ...
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	... and the handle of the cautery is shaped like a nail, with a head like a nail in which there is a small prominence in the middle part
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place your hand over the area of pain, and hold your hand — so that the cautery does not burn the skin — and move the iron slowly back and forth.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that is burned by the cord is great, as much as half, elevate your hand so that the artery is not burned, so that there is no obstruction of blood flow
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then immerse the wound in salt water and place it over the area, and leave it for three days; then remove the dressing and cover the wound with a bandage, and take care of it until it is healed
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the tip of the toe according to the cautery, and keep the incision of the artery in this way without prejudice to its antiquity.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cautery of ancient embolism.</start_of_turn>
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you have cured the embolism as we have said in the preceding treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of the diseases, and you do not avail yourself of the treatment, and sometimes because of the disease that does not reach that which we have said of the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then cover the cautery of the toe until it is whitened, because it signifies over the area of pain along the line of length of which is the majority of the finger, or whatever; and withdraw your hand for a moment and hold it down when you are incising the artery so that you do not reach the bone.</start_of_turn>
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	But it is necessary that you take care of the continuity of the mandible, which is harmful for chewing, and that the nerve is not burned and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood of the abseced artery, which is dangerous, and more so to that one who ignores what it does and is not careful; leave the operation in it from the beginning.</start_of_turn
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I remind you of the regimen for the flow of blood concerning the incision according to the custom of this book.</start_of_turn
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not benefit from this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and care for the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with two hooks, and this is a better cautery and safer.</start_of_turn
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.</start_of_turn
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cautery of the pains of the heel.</start_of_turn
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the heel there is pain from cold and is cured by means of lacative causes and by the other treatment which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, which is called puncture, of which this is the form: ...
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then prick around the area with the ignition, and be careful around the entire heel as if it were rotating, or in the area of some nerve if the pain is in some area.</start_of_turn
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Slowly move the cautery along the edge of the heel without causing excessive pain.</start_of_turn
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery has pierced the heel in ten points, and what is that, and then care for the wounds until they are healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Burn with cautery.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	When the burn is complete, and the cautery is not to be repeated, except for the species which cause swelling, as we have said in the division of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid burning the area which must remain dry or which is affected by a spasm of the nerves
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you have cured that kind of swelling from its root and from its head, and from its belly, and you have confirmed your cure, then cover the painful area with three cauteries: one at the root of the nail, the second at a little distance from the middle, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And leave the cautery on the painful area for the opposite of the diseased part, so that the burn does not extend further than the area that has healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is that you burn with a pointed cautery at the root of the nail somewhat above the nail head, and in the middle another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and withdraw your hand from the burn until the amount of the burn of the species of the code is consumed
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the way of cautery, and it is the species of the surgeon, the shape of which is like a knife with a flat blade
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	More gentle, however, is to make a few small incisions; and cover that more than with excessive thickness of dressing
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area around the burn until it has healed.
Capitol .vii.	End of treatment.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of ancient cautery for apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When the apoplexy is ancient and the patient has not had a fever, then burn with four cauteries: on all four nail heads; on the inside and outside of the head around the ear, as we have said; and on the eyebrow
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The way of performing the cautery is sufficient as we have said
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	The burn has already been done on the mouth of the stomach; more is not necessary; and take care of the patient until recovery takes place
Capitol .viii.	End of treatment of ancient apoplexy
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cautery for sudden pain caused by inflammation
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover the patient with a warm blanket at the beginning and give her medicinal pills to prevent chills.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And quickly cover the whole head of the patient and withdraw your hand from the area around the burn as described in the treatise on plasters
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And withdraw from any other cautery, as this is the way to burn
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this as we have already said
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Therefore if these are well; and if not, then burn three times on the back of the nail of the head, which are the most elevated parts of the head towards the back of the head
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And withdraw between each burn the thickness of the finger, and take care of the burn until it has healed
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you are addicted and the patient can tolerate it, burn in the middle of the head; if you wish to increase the addiction, burn over the two nails.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Take care of the area until it has healed; and the burn should be done with olive oil according to the shape which has been said.
Capitol .ix.	End of treatment of sudden pain caused by inflammation
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cautery of boils and mollification of all the body
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover the head of the patient with a blanket and with water as we have said; then quickly cover the head of the patient, and burn on the middle of the head, on all the nails of the head, on the back of the head, and on three places on the vertebrae of the spine
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If necessary in the disease of mollification of the body of the tropics, that is when the patient is tolerant and the disease is violent, then burn four times on the vertebrae of the pelvis, and then withdraw your hand until the burn is consumed by the code, and hold the hand away from the area
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Take care of the area until it has healed, and do the burn with olive oil
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Chapter X.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized except that which is for flexibility.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore modify the head of the limb from the beginning towards the end and towards the other treatment which we have dictated in the division when the illness is great and it tolerates the exclusion of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer from the medicines, then give safeguards and masticators to serve him, giving him this for several days, for the benefit of the food
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then remove the head of the illness, and then cauterize that which is like a pointed cautery in the middle of the head according to the manner mentioned above, and on every corner of the head you shall cauterize
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the illness is strong and it tolerates, then cauterize that which we have said, having paralyzed and softening the body over the vertebrae of the thigh and the vertebrae of the buttocks
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And olive oil shall be cauterized as above mentioned.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the illness is a child, then stop cautery slightly according to this manner.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xi.	The eleventh chapter.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cautery of melancholy.</end_of_turn>
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and great heat, then cauterize that which we have said is to be cauterized, having paralyzed it.</end_of_turn
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive coldness declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humous, then give him to drink that which softens the head of the limb according to what has been said in the division.</end_of_turn
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then remove the head of the illness, and then make a descending twist about the circle, and then stop that in the middle of the head.</end_of_turn
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient shall sit down relaxed, and shall be kept in all parts.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then pause liniment; and it is more advisable to border around sheep.</end_of_turn
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And cover that over the fire for temperate heat for measure, which will make him suffer when it is more in it.</end_of_turn
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then bring that which is in the middle of the head of the limb in the circle, and keep it until it is inflamed.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give him to drink every day for a week a little while, with the other regulation of the body until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that which makes little points according to the best of him, but keep your hand over his head in such order: this is a kind of cautery which moistens the head equally.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then stop that which is boiling in butter or in greasy greaves.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xii.	The twelfth chapter.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the cautery of descending water in the heel.</end>
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you at the commencement of the water in the heel for the humors which we have said in the division, then commence and give him to drink the patient that which softens the head of the limb, and keep him away from all humors.</end_of_turn
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him bathe in lukewarm water for several days.</end_of_turn
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command him to raise his head, and cauterize that which is like a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize two cauteries on two temples if it is the commencement of the evacuation of two heels, or one at the commencement of the evacuation of one heel.</end_of_turn
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incisions must be made over all the veins and arteries which are left by the coccyx; and let the cauteries be made in that length in the latitude of the temples.</end_of_turn
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep away from fluxes of urine when it is cauterized; and if you see that there are fluxes of urine, stop any medicine that is to you possible.</end_of_turn
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I know of the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of them and care for fluxes of urine.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And many veins are cauterized at the root leaving two bones with two cauteries which are produced immediately.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Chapter XIII.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the humors are ancient, they are retained in the veins and arteries which are manifested on the surface of the head, and it is confirmed that these are superfluous fiery phlegmas. Therefore, when we have recounted in the chapter on the commencement of water the cautery which we must perform on the head, as well as in the middle of the head and on both sides of the head, we must make two cauteries on the temples and two cauteries on the nape of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you wish to add more, the cautery is made on the whole breadth of the heel towards the outer edge of the nail with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cautery of the stench of the nose
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your physician has said enough and has not benefited from your medicine, you must appear and give the patient to drink for three nights; then raise his head, and cauterize the middle of the nose with olive oil
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And cauterize the claw with two cauteries on the two nails, leaving a little space between them.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Beware of the thread that you do not burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is how you must cauterize the claw.<end_turn>
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery of the softening of the eyelids of the humors.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the humor is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery; this is the way to do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you like, cauterize over the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries throughout, and let them extend from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid of the humor when it has become converted to the parts of the pupil and pressing it down
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the pupils of the humor are converted to the parts of the pupil and pressing down, cauterize in two ways, either by burning or by medicinal means that consume.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize with fire, command the patient to drink until the pupils dilate as much as those which are seen to dilate from the wind; and if you press down, put a bandage over their eyes so that it does not burn them until the pupils are born anew
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are born anew and equal, then stop the head of the patient in the belly and bring your hand over the eyelids of the humors of the patient with a tremor, in the manner of a dead fern leaf, and let the sign begin at the pupils
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And finally rest for a moment in the warmth of blood or in mucus on the humors.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	This is the way to perform the cautery
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize over the figure which you have signed, little by little, in mossy veils, until the surface of the code is as much like a dead fern leaf as possible, throughout.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of completion of your work is that you see the pupil of the humor already contracting and the pupils of the humors being elevated beyond the puncture of the humor
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore elevate your hand and leave it there for three days, and then rest over it with a border until the scar is healed
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it until it is healed
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	However, if it returns for any reason, then press down again and the pupil is softened, then perform the cautery once more over the whole thing as you did at first
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	However, if the pupils are in the eyelid, then cauterize that only when it has been raised to its natural height and is equal, and that the pupils do not press down on the humor
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	However, this is done with medicinal means, for which you command the patient to drink until the pupils dilate as much as those which are seen to dilate from the wind, and you should apply a piece of sponge in the shape of a dead fern leaf
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take from the patient's throat some saliva with a spoon, and mix with a little vinegar. And take from the patient's throat some saliva with a spoon, and mix with a little vinegar. Or take from that what is there and mix them well together, and do so with fasting, so that it does not become cold; and expand with this over the paper which is to be made like a leaf of ivy, and place that over the one or both; and place your hand over the head of the patient so that the head does not move around in the vomit.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your hand over the medicine and do not move it until the patient feels the bitterness of the medicine, for the bitterness is in them just like fire
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the other bitterness has ceased, then read the medicine and do not touch it until I tell you to do so; and when the bitterness has ceased, then remain the medicine and wash the hand over the wound with vinegar; and then consider whether sometimes the eyelid has already been raised just like it is washed away by the constriction of fire or incision, for this is good; and if it does not return from the medicine on the place where it was not pressed, and it does not yield until the operation is completed and the hand is healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And remain over the hand at the border until the redness of the swelling has passed away, and care for that until it is completely healed or until it is healthy
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, after your operation, to keep an eye with diligence that the medicine does not fall from the head, and if the eyelid is somewhat softened in these days or if there is any cause for the hand to swell, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, just as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of ivy leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that the humors of men are diverse according to their magnitude and their smallness, and therefore according to what is useful for your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not be ashamed of the way things are done in this art.<end_turn>
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</start_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cautery for fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.</start_turn
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of the diseases and you do not confer your care, then you must know that you must cauterize that according to this manner: command the patient to keep their head still, and keep their head of their body between their thighs in such a way that it is neither moved nor agitated on the head cap.<end_turn
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then keep the hand covered in vinegar or in mucus over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the cautery which is of this shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is hooked, like a hook or a penknife, from one extremity to the other of that which is to be cauterized.<end_turn
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you will, penetrate through to the other extremity.<end_turn
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, do the same as with a hook.</start_turn
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Better is the cautery that is hooked to the side.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and bring healing to it and dry that out.</start_turn
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open that and extract the pus from it.</start_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then keep the cautery away from the eye which is well ignited, and touch the eye with a little of the cautery from the side of the nose, so that you do not move your hand or that the patient becomes frightened, and then keep the cautery over the eyeball and remove that.</start_turn
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore if at the beginning of the treatment the cautery penetrates the bone, it is not good; and if so, repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary; and leave that for three days, and then keep the hand over that border and keep the eye dry until it is healed.</start_turn
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been more than twenty days and it is not healed, then leave over the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and is scraped as it is convenient in the chapter above.</start_turn
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another manner of cautery for fistula which we will say at the beginning: enter the place of the fistula and make that, and then keep your hand over that split of the bone which is the shape of it: and put in that the quantity of one or two drops of lead melted; and keep your hand well pressed against the good retention, and do not be frightened by the patient because of the lead which is not to reach the eye; and cover that the eye of the patient is covered with vinegar or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals that in a miraculous way.</start_turn>
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula has healed with the cautery and dressing described above, it is not necessary; otherwise, it is necessary to administer medicine through the nose and reduce the fistula to the root of the nose as appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	The fistula has healed with the cautery.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Blisters appear on the lips, and more frequently in children's lips
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you have cured those fissures with the medicine that we have mentioned in the instructions, and you have not benefited from your treatment, it is necessary to make a small incision as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And make the incision following the curvature of the nail
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then stop that bleeding immediately in those fissures until the cautery reaches the root of the fissures
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that until it heals properly.
Capitol .xix.	End of document
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Treatment of fistula in the mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is swelling of the uvula or palate or teeth, and the swelling breaks, becomes old, and pus comes out, and there is a fistula, and you have treated it but without benefit, then it is necessary to cauterize the fistula according to the quantity of pus received in the fistula. Then put the cautery into the nose of the fistula and keep your hand over it until the fire reaches the root of the fistula. And after that, do whatever is necessary to make an opening or two. And take care of that until it heals properly
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore if the swelling is abscesses and is healed, it is not necessary; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the root and remove the corrupted bone as appropriate
Capitol .xx.	End of Manuscript
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Treatment of teeth and softening of veins
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When veins are softened by humidity and teeth are blackened, and you have treated them with medicines without benefit, then it is necessary to place the tip of the instrument in the groin and make an incision of the shape you deem appropriate. While you are doing this, hold the hand over the tooth until the fire of the cautery reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And take your hand away, and make the incision several times as you wish
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And keep the patient's mouth filled with salt water and leave it there for an hour, and then remove it, because the blackened tooth is stopped and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted humidity is dried up
Capitol .xxi.	End of Manuscript
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Treatment of toothache
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When the toothache is due to cold, or if it is cold or hot, or if the treatment with medicine does not help, it is necessary to cauterize in two ways: either with a cold cautery or with a burning cautery
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cold cautery is that you take the edge of a cow's hoof and make a hole in the bottom of a metal spoon, and then put your thumb over the end of the handle, and plunge that into the tooth that aches without delay
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And make several incisions until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	Or if you wish, immerse a sponge or cloth in the broth that you have mentioned, and place that over the painful tooth, and keep the fire ignited until the fire reaches the curvature of the tooth
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But the burning cautery must be used with caution, and you must take care that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth or cause them any damage.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And make the incision of the shape you deem appropriate, and keep your hand over the tooth until the cautery is cooled; and make several incisions so that the pain may disappear or at least diminish on that day or the next day
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And take care that after the cautery the patient fills their mouth with good blood and leave it for an hour and then remove it; this is the way to cauterize
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize where you wish most, as you are able.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the way of the needle: ...
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cautery of external swellings
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When swellings are caused by inflammation and cold humors and do not yield to medicines, then you should burn them away with a cautery. The way in which you should do this is as follows: place two extremities under the swelling so that the smoke from the cautery will not reach the other extremity. Keep the flame away from the area surrounding the swelling with a gauze, and do not remove the dressing until the swelling has disappeared.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, then keep the cautery away from it according to the size of the swelling. Keep it covered for three days and do not remove the dressing until the swelling has subsided and all that the fire has consumed has disappeared
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound, the bandaging and the cloth until it is healed
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the needle or you must make the cautery in such a way that it does not damage the surrounding area.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery of the root of the tongue and the constriction of the throat
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity is over the root of the tongue, and especially when it is of cold composition, then you must evacuate the patient with laxatives at the beginning and then cauterize the area under the tonsil in the groove below it
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And take care that you do not reach the tonsil with the cautery or that you do not burn the edge of the tongue but only a little bit
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize the area beyond the cautery of the joint of the jaw with the last vertebra of the neck.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of the jaw should be carried out in the same way as before
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound as has been said before until it is healed
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery of the pulmonary disease and cough
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and pulmonary disease are caused by cold humors and the patient has neither fever nor inflammation and is an old disease, then you must make two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed areas under the tonsils; and another cautery in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and the cautery should be carried out as before
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make the puncture of the cautery as is usually done for the puncture of heel pain. The way in which it is done is as described in the puncture of ankle pain
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the surrounding area as has been said before until it is healed
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And indeed, the cautery should not be made more than three times according to this fashion: make three cauteries in this way.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery of the nipples which is the head of the assistant
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to greasy humors and does not yield at the time of sleep, you must reduce the dislocation before it returns on its own, and in order to do this you must perform a slight movement so that it slips out; as we have learned from experience, you must first reduce the dislocation, and then bring the patient back to the position in which they were before, either sitting or lying down; and finally lift the chin so that the part which is at the bottom of the nipple is at the level of the parts above it on the left side, if the dislocation is at the bottom.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take care that the cautery does not burn two nipples; and this is the way to do it
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And cauterize the chin until it pierces the other side; and the figure of the cautery will be that of four nipples
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so according to the quantity of hair; and this is the way to do it
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And every bandage is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And take care that the cautery does not burn the skin with soot, and keep the patient calm, and do not move the limb for any time until it is comfortable
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If dislocation has occurred in the joints above and below, and if it is caused by this, then cauterize over the Achilles muscle or the plantar muscle with a pointed cautery, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dispersed and the pain is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	The treatment involves cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moist matter in the stomach that comes from the excess of its composition and multiplies the humors to it, and if you continue your methods of care without confirming it, then know that the pain must be above the navel, extend your hands and feet, and then cauterize with three cauteries: one on the sole of the foot for the amount of one finger above the Achilles muscle, and two on the sides of the cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery appears; and stretch out the rest that are not adjusted, which will make the wound less painful.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the wound is equal to two-thirds of the breadth of the navel.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery should be as follows: [...] And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this figure; and this is a circular cautery according to this figure: [...]
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize the stomach where it is sensitive to the cautery: and that you mark on the stomach the place where you wish to make the cautery, and then cauterize that point; and then care for that area with the care that precedes until it is healed
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On cauterization of the fatty foot
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the foot due to cold, moisture, or excessive wind, that normal fat from the belly is expelled by excessive evacuation, and the pain is cured as we have said without confirming it, then know that the pain must be above the navel, and mark with your finger three cauteries according to this figure and this quantity and apply them to the foot below the hipbones, holding the heel of the foot.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be as wide as the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be as long as the breadth of the limb.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not tighten over the cauteries too much
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of liquid that is poured out is equal to the amount of the major part of the species of the navel, and it is not more adjusted; and if the pain is standing on the feet, then hold still, because you have already extended your cushions, and lift up the knees
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery: [...]
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you can also cauterize these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when it is at your discretion and prudence in the art
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And keep in mind that you must not process too much in the cautery, and that the species of the whole navel must be cauterized so that the whole limb is cauterized and reaches the intestines, because the navel here is subtle; and be careful.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.</start_of_turn
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of the abscess of the foot with a cautery
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an abscess or swelling in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the membrane of it, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the pain is severe and the swelling is acute
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the foot, with great pain which often makes the doctors despair of its cure
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore know that the pain must be raised above the navel; and mark the place of the abscess with your finger; and then burn the cautery that is assembled like felt, as its shape is described in the other page
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize until all the limb is covered, until it reaches the hip bone, until it is completely healed
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other abscesses until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this method of cautery except for those who have studied it in the art of medicine and who know many other methods; for in these cases some experiments have been made which show that it is useful in this operation, but nevertheless read what you must about it, for it is more prudent
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	From cautery of the foot.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Say the old physicians of the ancient times cauterized the foot according to this manner: take a dry splinter of aristeology of a length equal to that of the thumb and as thick as the great toe.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And immerse that in oil and burn that at the fire, and cauterize with a pointed cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the ribs; and with two small cauteries let two guides go, one slightly declining towards the part that is beyond the beard, and two cauteries in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the twelfth, slightly declining towards the back; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach; and three cauteries on the back; and a fourth cautery in that place which is between the two buttocks, and two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between two buttocks.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but rather on the appearance of the wound on duty.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And indeed the old men say that these are the men who use cautery like a ray of iron and fire, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until we reach that apostema and it is cured, just as we have said in the apostema of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Moreover in this perforation with the cautery let there be no fear, because much has happened in that fistula which has not been cured.
Capitol .xxx.	The king has ordered that this case be heard in the tribunal of the great physicians.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the heel.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you have cured the disease of the heel as we have said in the division, and you do not refer your care, then the cautery in it is done in three ways, which are all safe, namely that you make three or four incisions according to the length of the heel according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery let the thickness of a thumb or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be even over the seat of two.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another manner of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two assistants, which cause we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the limb which is at the end of the heel towards the belly of the patient without causing the patient pain on the left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such as to elevate the limb according to the length of the limb, so that both cauteries are made according to the width of the body
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And immediately insert the two assistants, ignite more, in that place where we have pierced the limb of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And immediately remove the cautery; and thus there are four cauteries in total
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with three assistants
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And let your care be longer than usual for a few days, because it is different from the other preceding causes in the care
Capitol .xxxi.	The king has ordered that this case be heard in the tribunal of the great physicians
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery of hydropic swelling
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The cautery does not suffice in hydropic swelling but in alcinte properly
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you have cured the hydropic swelling as we have said in the division, and you do not refer your care, then the hour covers that four cauteries are made in the circumference of the belly and one on the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the heel, and two between the vertebrae of the two, and one in the groin, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the limb
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And immediately put the cautery inside so that it gets stuck for a long time
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the disease from care along with the cautery because it is added to them two understandings, and if it is not held back it will be cured by the helper.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The instrument which is to cauterize the belly should be shaped like a claw, according to the shape of that which has gone before, and that which has the two olives following its shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	The instrument which is to cauterize the belly should be shaped like a claw, according to the shape of that which has gone before, and that which has the two olives following its shape.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	About the cautery of the feet and the bowels.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrosis and are filled with sour water, cover that you cauterize the feet over the two metatarsals without harming that which is between the heel and the little toe; and raise your hand over the cautery and do not twist it; and elevate your hand, and do not return it until the sour water has subsided.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is like this: Place two cautery instruments over the two joints, and in any place where it is necessary to cauterize, do so at the tip of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be of the length of the joint: leave the nails and the other below the middle of the joint; and over each joint place two cautery instruments.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that any water that remains may come out.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And take care of the things which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of document.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	About the cautery of the body of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the belly is full of cold and humidity and the humors are within, so is the digestive and retaining virtue, which is in the stomach and in the intestines. And it is cured by the methods of treatment and does not cause harm; sometimes the patient suffers from excessive application of the virtue, for when the great cautery is made on the great stomach according to what has been said previously concerning the stomach, at the circle and with four cautery instruments around the subumbilical embolus, at the claw-shaped cautery; and over the navel with great care, or with two cautery instruments.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And sometimes when the external humors are excessive and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize over the fifth space and over the intestines, and firmly adjust two cautery instruments over the stomach and below the flanks, which is perfect treatment for the evacuation of which there is no error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	End of document
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	About the cautery of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are naturally formed ancient hemorrhoids or when there are gross cold humors or corrupted humidity, and these are cured by what has been said in the division and do not cause harm, then cauterize with three cautery instruments over the base of the two little triangles and the little triangular, and remove the navel cord with two fingers
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the stomach of the patient is congested and the food is not digested, and the face is sometimes pale, then cauterize that area over the great stomach according to what has been said previously; and one cautery instrument over the flank and another cautery instrument over the belly with a claw-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery in place for a while, and then take care of it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	End of document
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	About the cautery of the heel close to the abscess of the limb.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When the heel abscesses, then cauterize with an instrument that is like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And bring that fire close to the heel abscess and finish by placing your hand over that part until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood escapes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make a mark or two, because if you achieve too many, then cauterize each one according to what has been said, and take care of them with that which has been said to prevent them from coming out until they are healed
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with great cautery over something, it is more painful in evacuation
Capitol .xxxvi.	End of document
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	About the cautery of fistulas that are naturally formed in the parts of the body
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is tormented by it, whether he is healthy or cauterized
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when any fistula is formed naturally and is ancient, corrupted by dirt and humidity, then what is more deserving than to try to treat it with a claw-shaped cautery, and to take care of the depth of the wound with the front of the hand that tries
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And apply the cautery lit with fire to the fistula, according to the degree of its tension
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat the process until the corrupt parts are consumed, a good bit or two or three, according to the degree of your need
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Beware that you do not burn nerves or blood vessels; or if the fistula is in the bladder or the abdomen, take care of all the surrounding parts. Do not proceed until the fistula is in solid tissue and you suspect that it is not penetrating
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the area until it is healed
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the area is sealed, and the material has been removed from it, and it is left undisturbed for a long time, then know that it has already healed entirely
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the material has not been removed from it, know that it is penetrating or in the root of it, or that it is corrupted, because these things will remind you of it in the area
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cautery of the bones.</start_of_turn>
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the bones there is pain due to cold or excessive wind, and to relieve the suffering of the patient, it is necessary to cauterize over the bones. The cautery should be applied over every bone where there is a suspicion of inflammation.</start_of_turn
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And perform the cautery with small intervals, because three cauteries placed in a line will suffice, and thus they will remain more useful.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.</start_of_turn
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder suffers from excessive urination and swelling due to cold and humidity, and the patient's urine is not retained, it is necessary to cauterize in the lower part beyond the bladder, at the start of the fifth space, and cauterize with a cautery at the apex and at the base.</start_of_turn
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	The length of each cautery should be according to the degree of the swelling; and perform the cautery with two cauteries if necessary.</start_of_turn
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be applied with care.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XIX.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cautery of the nail.</start_of_turn
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is pain in the nail due to cold and humidity, and to prevent inflammation, and when the nails are corrupted and delayed in their eruption, and when there is pain due to their hardness, it is necessary to cauterize the area around the navel with three cauteries, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder. And perform the cautery over the lower part of the two bones, or with two cauteries. The cautery should be applied with care.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XX.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery of dislocation of the ankle.</start_of_turn
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is mucus humidity that has infiltrated the ankle area, and when there are painful causes of dislocation of the ankle, and a sign of the latter is that the ankle is longer than the other when compared.</start_of_turn
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The area of dislocation is grasped firmly.</start_of_turn
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then perform the cautery over the ankle of the patient with a circular cautery, because you have seen that there is a tremor in the circumference of the area as if it were revolted, and so that the area falls gently from the circle.</start_of_turn
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the shape of the cautery that precedes this is like that of the stomach.</start_of_turn
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, perform the cautery with three cauteries and a large olive.</start_of_turn
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And perform the cautery with care according to the degree of inflammation of the whole limb; and take care that the area is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XXI.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.</start_of_turn
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the ankle area, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is cured as we have said before and we do not recommend anything else, and when it is old, know that you must remove the cold humors from the limb with yellow pills or artificial pills or something similar; and then perform the cautery.</start_of_turn
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in this case is in two manners: either with cautery applied with medicines that combat, or with cautery applied with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And according to two known methods, of which one is to cauterize that over the breadth of the limb with three triangular cauteries in this fashion; and do so with good depth.</end_of_turn>
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And concerning the space between each cautery and the quantity of thickness of the limb, let it be that of the breadth of the finger, and if the cautery is olive or great.</end_of_turn
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And several physicians say that the cautery should be placed on the middle part of the limb over the head of the bone, for there are four cauteries.</end_of_turn>
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you will, cauterize around the circumference which precedes the form of dislocation of the ankle, and which is a continuous circle and burns away the spiciness of the entire heel.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in this case when the pain is adherent to the ankle and is not extended to the cavity.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it is extended to the cavity, then do cauterize that with two cauteries on the cavity over the area to which you send the patient which is the pain; and one cautery on the heel for four fingers a little beyond the wrist.</end_of_turn
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery burns, and the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of spiciness of the heel.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient sends that the pain is extended to the area beyond the toes, then do cauterize that here where you send with a cautery for three points or four or more if you deem it necessary.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient sends that the pain is leaving the cavity, then do cauterize that here with a pointed cautery.</end_of_turn
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And keep in mind in all cauterization that you do not reach the nerves or great arteries, and that for this reason you must be careful over the patient, lest you do them more harm than good.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen two of these who, having cauterized on the heel, ultimately finished with the limb swollen within that the tumor achieved the foot, and the limb perforated and corrupted all the way through.</end_of_turn
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And take a strong solution of vinegar, and also that you must be prepared for death.</end_of_turn
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each according to this manner.</end_of_turn
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the learned men say concerning the cautery of the ankle that the cautery should be like a circle of iron whose circumference is the measure of a palm; and its depth should be as deep as the seed of an olive or less.</end_of_turn
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And draw that circle a third time; and let the space between them be the quantity of the nail of the thumb; and make those circles wide enough for two fingers, and let the length of those nails be a nail or two, and make in those grooves of iron adequately placed on the circles; and this is the form of them.</end_of_turn
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let the fire be ignited in the firebox until it turns black and sparks appear, and let it be placed over the part of the ankle, the patient lying on his side.</end_of_turn
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that with three cauteries surrounding in one go.</end>
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And thus leave that for three days; then apply a plaster to that around the border and leave the wound open for several days; and take care of that until it is healed.</end>
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	The physicians say: or, children, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of its repercussions, and because few have found that which are beneficial for it.</end
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And among the best cauteries for them is that which is applied to the place of the pain.</end
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Better are the cauteries with medicines than those that remain, for you must make two circles having a pierced hole in which to insert the nail of the hoof; and let the length of the nail in the heel be two nails or as many as those.</end
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And let the space between them be the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and make them wide enough from each other, and that they should contain each other according to this form.</end
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then rest on the part of the ankle the patient lying on his side, and compress your hand on the part of the ankle; and take cold water from two circles and put it between the two circles, and the quality of that water should be little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the pain of the ankle — for that other biting is like that of fire — until the biting stops.</end
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then rest for three days and suspend treatment until the redness of the bruise has disappeared, and repeat the treatment for a while; this is the last remedy.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of him until he is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the groin or the thigh, make him sit in a position that contains water as much as is appropriate for the ankle swelling.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the way of warm water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.</end_of_turn>
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and caustic powder, neither of which is extinct, take one part of each, grind them and suspend them in a new liquid from which one part is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that enters.</end_of_turn
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And let the liquid of the other wave go out, and pour over that alkali and caustic powder alive with warm water which you take by a finger, and when you have grasped them with your thumb for a good compression, and let the remainder that comes from the acute water go out to the other wave.</end_of_turn
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, and take another caustic powder alive and another alkali renewed, so that the heat that remains will not be strong acute, which is administered in surgical operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because this operation is of fire.</end_of_turn
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And so of many medicines that are cauterized widely, some are done quickly and badly and others slowly and carefully; and caus with sulfur are added that they are mixed together.</end_of_turn
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And here is the record of an old man from among the ancients who underwent an operation and treatment for pain in the ankle and sciatica, and praised its benefit so much that he said that no other treatment was necessary, and that he was healed by simply resting as recommended, for he found that that treatment was sufficient to heal that entanglement in the bath and indeed that it had already passed from that.</end_of_turn
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is present in certain herbs, and if it is not found in the herbs, take recent fig, and do not grind it with too many grains, but leave it bound to the ankle in which the pain is, or in the groin or the thigh, and bind it.</end_of_turn
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for the amount of three hours or for the amount that the patient can bear of the bruise.</end>
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And so put that in the bath and when the body of the patient is tanned, take it out of the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.</end>
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Remember that no one should use these medicines without the evacuation of the body.</end
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Yes indeed, when there is a wound of a goat, the stretic vein is cauterized, and for this purpose it is taken wool and soaked in oil, and is placed between the tarsals of the foot and between the bones.</end
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take dry wound of a goat, burn it with fire until it is black; and then place it on the wool and let it rest until it is stretched out.</end
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.</end
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of cauterization is called the cauterization of cows.</end<end_turn>
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LXII.</end>
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization of pain of two.</end
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some diseases cause pain in the two together, as for example by bite or by blow or by excessive evacuation, and for such causes, by infusion of hot and humid matter.</end
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterize only in this single kind that is useful for the emission of hot matter.</end
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, take care, in the evacuation of the patient with pills that are fixed and similar to them, that they are useful over the two in which the pain is three lines according to the breadth of them, because it has to do with the attempt in any line or cauterize or otherwise, according to the quantity that comes from the patient’s tolerance and the virtue of them.</end
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cauterization is useful with point cauterization.</end
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries or with two clavilh medial in this way:</end
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Capitol .xliii.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	The swelling of this disease is caused by the small bones of the limbs; and a sign of the beginning of the disease in children is that it causes them pain when they flex their joints, and swelling and stiffness in the ankles and knees.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And thus in the back is the response of the two bones of the legs that already begin to overcome the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see it once and you wish to prohibit it, then cauterize in that place which is circular in this way:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that you burn around the whole circumference of the vertebra without damaging it
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with two or three points of cautery.</start_of_turn>
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be well spaced from each other.</start_of_turn>
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then take care of the area so that it is healthy with what we have said.</start_of_turn
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Take care that the cautery is not administered in swelling that is useful for spasm of nerves.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	From the cautery of gout and joint pain.</start_of_turn
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout is caused by cold with skillful treatment and no remaining pain, the pain will remain cauterized.</start_of_turn
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And that you burn around the evacuation near the joint of the foot with the previous cautery.</start_of_turn
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the burn be like olive oil in this way:</start_of_turn
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.</start_of_turn
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises within the bones or to the other joints, and when the swelling subsides, then burn over every pain with three or four cauteries of this olive oil throughout.</start_of_turn
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more than these cauteries are necessary, then burn only as much as is necessary without damaging the skin too much, sending only the smoke away from the tip of the cautery.</start_of_turn
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain persists in the bone and the two together, then administer the cautery mentioned in the previous chapter.</start_of_turn
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the joints and is acute, then puncture in the circle of the nails just as if you were rotating, puncture in those two lines.</start_of_turn
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in these places, then puncture in the circle of the nails over each bone and over the head of the hand.</start_of_turn
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain comes close to the muscles or the bones, then burn the whole circumference of the joints.</start_of_turn
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the disease well-regulated and with the reception of medicines, for if it is well-regulated and the inflammation subsides, it is evacuated with this cautery only, God helps.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery of fractures.</start_of_turn
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the bones and saying the bones break towards the knee, and when it is beginning to approach, then order the patient to lie down and use gentle means so that the wound comes away from the belly.</start_of_turn
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient between your two hands on the two sides, and command them to keep the limb away from the ground until the bone is set or the bruise or swelling disappears.</start_of_turn
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return the previous with the hands, and sign the fracture on the fifth bone with a sign similar to the thumb of the circle to the upper parts of the body.</start_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the burn be like this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Until it is soft and there are sparks.</start_of_turn
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And when you have made holes as many as necessary to enter the bone marrow with the cautery, repeat the process until you have reached the center of the bone in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe diligently the color of the intestine during the process of cautery, that you do not burn the intestine so that no great harm or death results from it
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And remember that when you burn [the] bone you must not neglect the bones, do not confer your operation
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And care must be taken that the burnings of the children be subtle according to their age and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the area of the burn for three days with a border around it until the burn mark of the fire is healed
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And care for those who are otherwise suffering from their burns until they are healed
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should rest on the bed for two days before he is allowed to walk until the wound and the burn are sealed
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And care must be taken to suspend their food according to the length of time of their treatment, which will make the patient's belly less sore, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of recovery
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to take them away after approximately twenty days, the time to administer proper nourishment must be administered faithfully, and keep this up for other twenty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And may you be remembered from this work of healing and replenishment of food and drink, and from your harsh words, for when you use this regimen of treatment the entire patient will be healed
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say the treatment of the ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you must not neglect, when you burn [the] hole around the cautery according to the quantity of them, and that which is extruded from the cavity just as much as the third part of them; and care must be taken of that which has been said, and it is not adjusted
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already said above that the first breaks must be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this fashion, because it is a sign with tentacles:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and the line is stopped that which is along the breadth of the wound and another line below; and put your hand over the cautery with a claw cautery, because the first cautery is more acute and better
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery of the bone.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When in limbs for some ailment or for percussion pain persists and does not subside with medicines, then it is necessary to burn with a pointed cautery.</end_of_turn
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the burning of the whole limb must be according to the magnitude and the thinness of it, and its force and extent, and the location of the fracture and the pain of it.</end_of_turn
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if it is well cured by the first burn, it is not good; and if not, repeat over it until the pain has disappeared; for it is often the case that these pains are due to the puncture of a limb towards that limb, so that you must consider that the burning must be done until the patient is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery of leprosy.</end_of_turn
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Many books speak of burning with a cautery for great benefit, but manage if the kind of leprosy which is useful for the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore when you wish to burn it, consider if the leprosy is common or if it is cured by that which we have said in the division and not in vain, and fear lest by the corruption the whole body of the patient and all his perfection should be consumed, for the hours you burn it over the head with two cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one at the back of the head, and over two nails; and one behind, over the nape or the shoulder.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally put your hand over the cautery for a little while until it has made a small imprint in the bone, and when the scales are loosened by it, so that the emission of thick vapor is relieved from it; and burn over the face according to what is necessary.</end_of_turn>
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then you must cauterize that area and those areas which we mentioned earlier; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on the two great toes, and two on two vertebrae of the collarbone, and six on the vertebrae of the chest, and one large one on the vertebrae close to the breastbone, one on the nipple, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the knee, and two on the muscles, and two on the testicles; cauterize that area over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and over each nail of the feet, and over the follicles of the breasts.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And take care of the nerves that are over the heel so that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And every vein is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the heel and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the heel bone
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you must know that when you adjust more cauteries, so much the more healing and comfortable it is; and you must know that the patient does not feel pain during the cautery, just as before, so that the body is already stupefaied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you must know that the cauteries must be large or small according to the members and the joints according to the species of the instruments
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the cautery with flour of barley or honey and with another care that it is healthy
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cautery of stupor.</end_of_turn>
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is stiff or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils and plasters, and is not healed, then you must cauterize that stiff limb with cauteries according to the greatness of the limb or the smallness of it.</end_of_turn>
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the scrotum be cauterized entering the spicitude of the codena a little.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is inside until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some veins are cauterized each stupor which has to do with the fingers and toes, and with the vertebrae of the chest and you must see the loosening of the nerves which are causing that member, and it is remapped the stupor.</end_of_turn
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume more than that which is known in the anatomy of the limb and in the exit of the nerves throughout the body moving.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cautery of the ulcer which is eating away.</end_of_turn
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the ulcer is old and does not benefit from the application of medicines, then you must cauterize over that where you previously cauterized a little according to the quantity of the spicitude of the codena until it is remapped the paleness and the color of it, and the color of it is changed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that with flour of barley and lentils with olive oil and with rue leaves, and with columb's ash or with yarrow's ash, give each a part and mix them all together, and apply it to the area and hold it in place until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .l.	Chapter L.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the cautery of cancer.</end_of_turn
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and appears in that area, then you must cauterize that area with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is revolting.</end_of_turn
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And say the learned ones that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the area; I do not know of this, for I believe that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen this in many veins.</end_of_turn
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more prudent to cauterize in the circumference of it as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.</end_of_turn
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cautery of tumors.</end_of_turn
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some tumors are delayed in maturity, and this is because of excess fat or because of the state of the patient, who is old in decrepitude, or for little strength, or for the time, and you want to expedite the maturity of the tumors; then you must cauterize in the circumference of them with multiple small punctures; and immediately apply that which will make it accelerate in maturity.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	May be if you wish to perforate them with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form: suspend that in the middle of the wound until it penetrates the bone.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you burn it in that place where there is more, so that the limb is relieved; and then take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cautery of a tumor.</end_of_turn>
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A tumor is a wandering corruption in a limb, which consumes that just as fire consumes dry wood.</end_of_turn
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if sometimes that tumor is in the place where you suffer pain from the cautery, then ignite the cautery needles few at a time, as is convenient in the place where it is a tumor.</end_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And take care of cauterizing that from all parts until you have eradicated all the corruption and there remains no cause of it.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And rest for three days, and keep your hands off the cauterized places until three days have passed since you have applied olive oil mixed with sulfur on them until the wounds have healed and all the corruption has gone.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And take care of that which is engendered by the wound.</end_of_turn
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	For indeed, if three times within three days the wound heals without corruption, it is not; but if so, then repeat the cautery over that which is remaining in the corrupted places.</end_of_turn
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And a tumor is treated in various ways with acute medicine, which is half as effective as the cautery.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	For indeed, the cautery with fire is of more use than medicine.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so take that as well when you have occasion.</end_of_turn
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cautery of abscesses and other similar lesions.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many veins flow downwards towards the feet of the sick who are called abscesses, and this is a great cause, made by a swelling, which lies in the foot; and the cautery is done in two ways, that is, with fire and with cold water.</end_of_turn
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	For indeed, the cautery with fire is that you ignite the cautery with a flame similar to that of a burn, which is made of iron according to the quantity of the abscess from all parts, and of fine stripes.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And take care of extinguishing that flame over the abscess, and then with your hand hold the cautery over the abscess until the cautery has reached the depth of the abscess.</end_of_turn
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And rest for three days until the limb begins to heal.</end_of_turn
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And take care of covering that with fresh cloth soaked in salt, and rest the dressing over that for a night, for that will eradicate the root of the matter.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the place where the abscess has been cauterized until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not heal, and many veins flow out onto the surface of the limb, mostly in the legs and feet, then you must administer in those cauteries with cold water, that is, take a small vessel or iron or burn, and place that over the abscess; and pour a little cold water over the vessel; keep your hand over it, and press that with your hand all around, and press the margin of the vessel against the root of the abscess, and keep the cold water flowing through the opening of the root; and wait for the patient an hour for the pain of the cold water to pass away. And do that until the abscess is eradicated from its roots.</end_of_turn>
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And indeed, so do I say of all these things that have been said before until we have overcome all of them.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And take care of those pus that remain after the roots of the abscesses have been eradicated by the cold of the water that engenders the pain of the wound.</end_of_turn
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery of tremor.</end_of_turn
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from fever or from another cause similar, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the two, between each two vertebrae with a cautery; and over the feet of the limb, and over the stomach of the limb, with olive oil.</end_of_turn
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The tremor of the patient relaxes and confirms the freedom of the acute pain.
Capitol .lv.	When the tremor of the patient subsides, the acute pain is confirmed to be freed.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	From an accidental burn of the body.</end_of_turn
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there is spreading of bile in the body, and pus-filled boils appear which are caused by corrupt thick matter; therefore cover immediately when the boils appear, that it be cauterized over all around the head of the fistula as deeply as possible, or at the root of a long fistula; or with a gradual incision.</end_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some other girls are cauterized at the beginning of their discharge in this manner; and they are not to be creased, and the excess is to be broken down by these means, and they will be healed of these.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Moreover cover that it is done at the same time as the evacuation with flebotomy.</end_of_turn
Capitol lvi.	End of session.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	From accidental burn of the flux of blood by incision of the artery.</end_of_turn
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many girls bleed from the artery which is cut under the plague which must be removed, or from the incision of apostemas or cautery of the limb, and in such a case, it is difficult to stop it.</end_of_turn
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when such an accident happens, quickly take hold of your hand over the wound of the artery and stop for a moment over that place where the thread is cut so that no blood escapes until the bleeding of the artery has stopped and that it does not flow out again.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And immediately stop the burning of olive oil a few and many, by name a few, and blow over them until they are not ignited.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And immediately take from those a little or a great one according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein urgently holding back the bleeding until it has stopped bleeding and restraining that blood.</end_of_turn
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the wound of the artery when you have remained over the wound and squeezed out the cautery, then take another cautery immediately and hold it firmly against the cauteries which are in the fire, so that no further bleeding occurs until the blood has clotted.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And take care that you do not burn the nerves that are here, and that you come to the patient with another illness.</end_of_turn
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in these cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: or by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when not extracted, or when extracted, when the limbs are burned and the blood is clotted, or when it is bound with thread or ligament for strong support, or when it is supported with medicines which have the property of restricting the bleeding; and it is strengthened by dusting with powder or constriction downwards.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Moreover, whoever administers downward restriction of the thread and tightening of the bandage or by position of causes which burn and prevent recurrence, does not comfort but rather harms.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Moreover, if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present or the medicine is not available, then immediately order the thumb to be held over the wound of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of the limb until the blood is finally separated from the plague; and that the bleeding from the artery is not allowed; and that the artery be moistened with cold water until the blood has clotted and become thick; and more than this, order cautery or medicine as necessary.</end_of_turn
Comensa la segonda partida.	Session two begins.</end_of_turn>
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and winds and of bleeding and of plagues and of their appearances.</end_of_turn
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucazes.</end_of_turn
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that cautery with fire is convenient and necessary in many diseases, and the occasions and causes of these, and the instruments necessary for these with the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters of the subordinate part of the head to the feet.</end_of_turn
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in that way, so that what is required is alleviated, concerning what has been demanded.</end_of_turn
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And since I am about to begin, I tell you that in this chapter terror is more dreadful than in the first chapter of cautery.</end_of_turn
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason great caution must be exercised, for in this operation the evacuation of the contents of the appendix, excision of a stone, opening of the abscess or draining of purulent discharge, or extraction of a splinter or incision of the bone must be accomplished.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these things are accompanied by fear and tremor, and in most of them death is at stake.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I also warn you that you must not attempt anything beyond your capacity, for some matters require the skill of a man who has learned to deal with many illnesses and diseases.</end_of_turn>
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among these things there is some that will go well with your illness, and some that will be burdensome for you. The cause of this is the violent nature of your disease, its duration, and the fear of death that accompanies it.</end_of_turn>
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among these things that I have mentioned, fear and superstition are often added, and hope for salvation is placed in that sanctuary, while the true disease becomes pernicious.</end_of_turn>
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not consent to anything that anyone advises you concerning this matter, for your caution should be greater than your desire, and your presumption about the cause of your ailment should not precede knowledge that is certain and reliable.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use instead for the treatment of all these ailments the prognostic signs and indications that are useful for the restoration of health, for in this lies the greatest aid to acquiring fame and glory, to the solace of life and the prolongation of days.</end_of_turn>
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children of God, may God enlighten you and guide you, for He is in your hand.</end_of_turn>
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter differently from the preceding ones, concerning the care of the head down to the feet, so that you may find in this chapter what you require concerning these things and what you need.</end_of_turn
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Concerning the care of the water contained in the head of children.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You must know that this disease often originates in children and that when the nurse washes the head of the child, the child’s life is in danger.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And many times the cause of this is unknown.</end_of_turn
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease except in children, and in all those whom I have seen it, death approaches. And for this reason I consider it my duty to leave this work concerning these matters.</end_of_turn
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so swollen that the child could not rest upon it even with the greatest effort, and that the humidity increased until the child died.</end_of_turn
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This humidity is either added between the cartilage and the bone, or is added outside the bone over the cartilage.</end_of_turn
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For if the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the appendix is little, then you must make a hole in the middle of the head with a fissure two fingers wide, until the humidity runs out. This is the way to remove the swelling.</end_of_turn
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is greater and the appendix is large, then you must make two holes according to this method:</end_of_turn
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is outside the bone, it is a sign that you have eaten too much food and drunk too much wine, and the water is squeezed out when you press your hand against the parts downwards and it is not in your belly.</end_of_turn
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Therefore make three holes in the middle of the head according to this method:</end_of_turn
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And return all the humidity from the incision; then strengthen the holes with strips and cushions; and give him to drink plenty of wine and oil for five days; and then remove the ligament and treat the wound with compresses and unguents, and strengthen the head by equalizing it; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the limb is healed and healthy.</end_of_turn
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision is to consider the size of the appendix and the collection of water, for sometimes the swelling is greater in the occiput or in the front or in the right or in the left; and therefore take care of the incision where the appendix is and the evacuation of the water, and do it as you deem most appropriate.</end_of_turn
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And note that you must not cut the artery, and indeed you must allow the blood to flow freely of itself from the wound and remain with the patient until the bleeding stops from the evacuation of the humidity.</end_of_turn
Capitol .ii.	Capitol II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the incision of the arteries that are close to the ankles, called "hilasseysse".
Capitol segon.	Second chapter
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When swelling occurs from boils or abscesses on the heel or foot, and this has already been recognized, and one does not trust in the cure of medicines, then the true cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore cover when you wish to make the incision so that the patient does not feel pain, and quickly pinch the area around the arteries to prevent them from bleeding, and strengthen the hand of the patient under the chest; and consider where the vein is placed; and the places where any of these are close to the ankles should be depressed so that nothing escapes from them.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then make another incision above the artery, and make an incision of each part of the acute angle at the incision to reach the bone, and do this for the width of the head
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, remove the surrounding fat from around the artery and tie it to the incisions of the parts below
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers adjusted, so that when any vein is incised the blood is ejected with a pulsatile stream, which escapes through frequent jumps.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	Moreover if the artery does not appear in the incision, cover that you measure the ankle three fingers wide, and tighten and make an incision to the bone
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you get from the blood is the quantity of one unc. and if you do not get much from it more or less, it is according to the quantity that appears from the virulence of the patient and the filling of the artery of them
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the wound, and therefore if anything remains on the bone of any cause of swelling, the hour to make an incision is so that no abscess remains
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the wound with sponges and silk threads of silk, and take care of that which is inside until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or acute boils or abscesses occur, due to agricultural humidity and for the quality of the lacerations of the temples, or even ancient violence that resembles these, and when these are not treated with medical methods, then we must resort to the extraction of the arteries in the temples or to the cauterization of these in the same way as we have shown
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient is placed in the temples for which they are; and understand that the visible artery in the temple is the one that you have shown by the mark, and that the rest is hidden except in a few people for its intensity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then strengthen the hand of the patient with some support; and quickly pinch the area with a rough sponge or evaporate the area with warm water until the visible artery appears.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And take the sponge of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And quickly draw the thread towards that which facilitates that the vein reaches the artery; and take away what is above and extract that which is below until you have extracted that from the tendon and revealed that from the tunicas which are left behind from that, from all parts
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Moreover if the artery is subtle, then cover that with the end of the nail, and make an incision of that part according to the quantity for which the ends of these are elongated and contracted, and do not bring out the blood, for if it is not incised it will not cure the blood of anything
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And evacuate from the blood one unc. three times
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is great, then cover that in two places with firm double support of leather or with strong threads, and do not touch it until the decay is over and the wound is consolidated, without bringing out the blood
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And close the excess which is between two ligaments; and do this in that hour or do it at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that which is cut within the bone which is cut by the cautery until the ends of these are incised, and stay in place of that useless work
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	E is better that the patient have fever or is suffering from scaly heat; for the cause of such affections helps the drying humors, and therefore is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	E covers almost the extraction of the arteries which are seen on the ankle, and if they are left unbandaged, dust falls down upon them adequately. And therefore do either cure with dry medicines or make them appear with calamine and plaster until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working you see blood flowing from the artery, at that moment you must restrain that blood, or cauterize it, or close the ankle, and press your hand over that area until the bleeding stops.</end_of_turn
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if no other cause appears to you, then stop the bleeding from the artery until the blood has clotted, and bathe the area with cold water until the pain subsides, and strengthen as much as you can.</end_of_turn>
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more curious in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with two clips having seen both places with a needle, and having stopped any bleeding, until they reach the bone and split the vein into two places, so that what is between the extremities is elongated, which are not consolidated by this cautery.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the acute of the two clips should be equal.</end_of_turn
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Better is if there is less acute than two clips, for if there is too great an acute of two clips near to any bone, it will cause the flesh to be scorched too quickly.</end_of_turn
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickness, keep the fire hot in those parts and the flesh will be cleanly separated.</end_of_turn
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in all works and more lightweight.</end_of_turn>
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between two clips be the quantity of the thickness of the finger.</end_of_turn
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the care of the limbs affected by acute and sour ulcers of the bones.</end_of_turn
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are sour ulcers, and it is the limb of those veins which are above the head of the tibia, and it is not interfered with by any cause of medical treatment, and sometimes the face of the patient already swells up and sits in front of walking like a walk of ants, and the bones of that limb are extended, humify them again as they were previously known, and the nails are scaly from the acute of the tears, which were previously good for treating these ulcers, and now that treatment is useless.</end>
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And command the patient to scrape away the nails for which are in front, and then make three incisions equidistant from each other according to the length of the front.</end
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision is equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the front, and the second according to the length of the tear ducts, and the third from the other part.</end
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.</end>
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of any incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.</end
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge pad or dry cloth moisten it with these which you will dry with the hand.</end
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And between them insert two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of them:</start
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the edge of the temples to the second incision.</start
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise at that whole the bone which is between two incisions over the bone, and do so that the incision may move from one incision to the second.</start
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And do the same with this pad and put in the first incision another instrument which is called cautery, blunt from one side and sharp on the other side.</start
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the bleeding of that sharp side against the soft tissue that is beside the bone, and the edges of the bone that are outside, and fill that up until it reaches the moving incision, and cut away everything that goes from the head to the bones.</start
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And continue the incision up to that where the bone ends, and do so that do so in the moving incision.</start
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as soon as the sacred quantity has gone, express the wounds of the patient's feet with vinegar.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately stop on every old wound, and stop over those dusts that are covered in fat, in vinegar and oil and vinegar strong, and do not leave it until the wound has closed.</end_of_turn>
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the ligament and administer great effusion of warm water or tepid, and do give oil rubbed with bay leaves and other herbs that the wounds may heal.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .v.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the care of the limbs for fractures and to the heels descend from the parts that are below the head.</end_of_turn>
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When at some time a fracture is acute and continues, and sometimes the heels of the patient extend slightly, and already the sight of them is deserving of pity, and the ulcers of the eyelids and their socket are for them, and in the front of the head is sharp pain leading to excessive stretching, therefore for these accidents that the substances and bones do not fracture but from veins that come from the lower parts.</end_of_turn
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is that you command the patient to raise his face, and immediately make an incision in the middle of the face, a little for the width (and begin with the incision on the left temporal bone to the right temporal bone; and let the incision be from the outside inwards; and lengthen your hand from the lacerations of the temples which are injured by chewing), until the bone is exposed.</end_of_turn
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the sacred with sponges or dry wool and immediately fill between the two lips of the incision with cotton or strips of cloth.</end_of_turn
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And do give oil rubbed with bay leaves and other herbs that the wound does not stick.</end_of_turn
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have drained away the wound and you see that the swelling has already diminished, the hour is to stop closing the bones until it begins to naturally knit, and do give care of that which regulates the drying which makes the flesh knit, as if you were taking wheat flour two parts and barley four parts and mixing or, make plaster of them and administer it to these wounds of the newly born flesh.</end_of_turn
Capitol .vi.	End of document.</end_of_turn
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the care of what happens in the ankles.</end_of_turn
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the causes that happen in the ankles are of four kinds, which are either mineral stone or causes similar to stone, such as iron and lead, or of plant origin such as chaff or beans, or is due to a fluid cause such as vinegar and strong vinegar and the like.</end_of_turn
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when stone is in the ankle or another cause similar to these that does not adjust or grow in the ankle, and the ankle is swollen, and sometimes the stone, do distill out in that case of olive oil or vinegar, and immediately administer the extraction of it, and make it vomit with condiment, and bandage the wound following the event of vomiting.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And do stop the circuit of the ankle with some pieces of wool or bandage, and stretch the ankle to the surrounding parts, because swelling caused by these causes is forceless.</end_of_turn
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not useless, do administer the extraction of it with the instruments called epicaricial instruments which are of this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forceless with the hand, it is good; otherwise, do administer the extraction of it with an incision of little duplication.</end_of_turn
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not forceless by vinegar, do make a needle of gut and insert the extremity of the needle into the hole of the ankle and close around the needle with wax and oiled for so that it is not torn except for the needle.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And do extract with the gut thread with strong traction, because it brings swelling like vinegar that we have mentioned.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Even if it is not forceless in this way, do take a piece of alum or of vinegar that appears pale with the ankle, and take as many as are desired, and put it on the extremity of the ray, and immediately wrap over it adequately.</end>
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And immediately insert it into the hole of the ankle with facility, and immediately dry the ankle of humidity.</end_of_turn
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not forceless from all the causes that we have mentioned, do suspect that it is due to excessive heat or spasm.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And thus at the beginning of the treatment, you must cleanse the patient's saphenous vein and extract the stone following the manner of its virtue. Then do that which will break the clot between your fingers and convert the yellow bile into its parts, and make a small incision in the root of the thumb to let out its gray matter before it causes further damage.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the opening of the wound is like a crescent, once the stone has passed, use appropriate instruments for that purpose. Then close the wound quickly and carefully, taking care that it is healed properly.</end_of_turn>
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the swelling lies in fatty substances that grow and infiltrate, then administer the cure and extraction of these. Even if you do not heed my advice, know that I will give you a subtle sign in this way:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer the incision of that fat which is causing the swelling in the heel.</end_of_turn>
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not be astonished when you find that the fat is already moist due to the vapor of the bile, and stop it in soft layers. Or extract it with pins or with a subtle incision as I have said, for the extraction is alleviated.</end_of_turn>
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which enters the heel, which causes the patient to cough at the beginning, fill the heel with some old rags, and put your hand over that heel in which the water is, and if it is forced out, do not be afraid; otherwise take hold of your thumbs and index fingers according to the length of the finger, and clench them in the heel a little, and the patient should insert one of those rags into the hole of the heel and jump over the one side of that part and strike the other side against the side which is causing the heel pain.</end_of_turn>
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not stop until all the water is forced out.</end_of_turn>
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is finally forced out, take hold of paper or sponges, etc.</end_of_turn And put one extremity in the heel and extend the other extremity with the heel over the flame until the pain is gone.</end_of_turn
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put another sponge there and do so until all the water is forced out, and then extract the stone with a needle as is commonly known.</end_of_turn>
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of any beast that is within that heel, if it is small, leave it in peace and do as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes fear at once, then administer the extraction with pin and nail, and the cause of the pain will be less severe than all the other causes which cause swelling in the heel.</end_of_turn
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms that are engendered in the heel, when you have cured that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and do not neglect your cure, then cover that the heel is exposed to the sun.</end_of_turn
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears, then extract that with pin or needle, subtle. And if no cause appears, take a needle and grasp the worm from the head and stretch it out so that its form is like that.</end_of_turn
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the sensitive part of the hand into the heel according to the quantity that the patient suffers because of the pain; and then use pressure with that to squeeze out the worms, doing so until all the worms are expelled.</end_of_turn
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not heed my advice, I will bind you and close the hole of the needle as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proven useful in the treatment of worms, and find them in the treatise on distillations.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your ointment with which you anoint the heel with these medicinal oils in the heel with this instrument, which is its form.</end_of_turn
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make a hole of silver or lead, leaving a small hole in it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it is done in the curvature of the retaining canula here where it is necessary.</end_of_turn
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the sponge and wrap it around the hand adequately, and pour oil into the hollow of the thumb, or the juice of any herb, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the canula – which is in the heel – and then insert the sponge with the hand and press with your hand that which will compress gently from within until the oil is expelled from the hollow of the thumb and the pain is relieved.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.</end_of_turn
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.</end_of_turn
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.</end_of_turn
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	E donc si veces oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:</end_of_turn
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.</end_of_turn
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.</end_of_turn
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.</end_of_turn
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si veces la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.</end_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.</end_of_turn
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.</end_of_turn
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.</end_of_turn
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.</end_of_turn
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.</end_of_turn
Capitol .ix.	Capitol .ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.</end_of_turn
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	The air is thick with large moisture in the eyelids and on the eyelashes.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation for them is to consider if the greatness is derived from them from the eyelids and is widespread; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore make over that fissure for the width, and then drain away that from all parts easily as you can, and then suspend that which is once and cut that
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	More if it is not manifested at the beginning if you do not pierce the eyelid with slight incisions, for then it will not be noticed in any way
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is great, then adjust that with sutures; and care for that until it is healed
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is slight, do not be excessive with that because the language of it restores that and nourishes it
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatness is descending towards the parts towards the root of the eyelid, you must scrape the surface of the root, for otherwise the eyelid will be elongated and will not be noticed in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And finally, after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the area until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	The treatment is complete.</start_of_turn>
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The care after the treatment for the dry moisture of the eyelashes is from the external application of oil.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The ointment which is generated in the tunics of the eyelids behind is gray, and especially in children, it makes their hair dull and causes their nails to become brittle; and it does not allow the brilliance of the sun to penetrate because the tears are retained by them.</start_of_turn>
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore you sometimes see them wiped over their faces all the time, and over their faces at night; and so over the eyelids of their eyes they put wet eyebrows, which already cover the inflammation, and the imminent danger of swelling is in the eye; and when you press on the area with your thumb, the swelling immediately subsides within them.</start_of_turn
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Every method of treatment is in that which the patient suspends his head over the thigh, and he rests his hands and feet on the ground, and makes a circle according to the amount that contains all the nourishment, and he suspends that over that and presses on the thumb of the hand that is over the thigh so that there is gathered an arc in the middle of the circle, and when he comes to the middle of that moisture which is incident upon the fissure for the width, the fissure is not greater than the fissure that is made in flabby tissue.</start_of_turn
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preparation when you have to make the whole circumference until you reach the nourishment, for in the most part processes the nourishment by fissure following the shape of white ointment.</start_of_turn
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore extract that which you have enveloped between the thighs which you hold between the thumbs of the hands.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And keep in mind that you do not stretch the fissure for this so that the moisture does not reach the hair and remove that.</start_of_turn
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if it does not appear to you in the beginning of the fissure, more adjust the fissure a little to facilitate the nourishment; and then extract that which we have said; and then moisten the area with oil and vinegar and place your hand over the area and tighten those which are like dust.</start_of_turn
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus when they are dry, stop that in the concavity of the fissure so that what remains of that moisture.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	More if an accident happens in the area afterwards, care for that which is softened with poultices until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xi.	The treatment is complete.</start_of_turn
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of treatment for the moisture of the eyelashes.</start_of_turn
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelashes naturally touch each other and are accustomed, when tears are excessive and there is a rubbing of the eyelids and cloth within them so that the moisture is the cause of the destruction of the hair that is called to touch the hair, care for it in four ways: or by cutting with a cautery; or by acute medicine as it is said in the chapter of cautery; or it is made by sticking with an incision and suture; or by cannas as I will say.</start_of_turn
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore keep the patient’s head over the thigh; convert the lower eyelid with your left hand, and if it is converted, do not; and if not, make an incision in the part where it is firm from the outside of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate from the inside, and when it is in place — from the margin of the eyelid where the lashes arise — from the lashes, and pull the thread towards the outside of the eyelid, and convert that which is like the ray.</start_of_turn
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	E aprop fen in the part of the inner canthus leaves them perpendiculosam ad spatum incidentarum del lacrimal major intra al lacrimal minor; et aprop extratz le fiel et pause dejos la canthus polvilhs parvulum de cotes vel de marpes, et aprop senare sur la canthus ad tenta, et sia ita sicut figura folii mirtae.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Then put the lower eyelid down so that it is parallel to the edge of the eye; and extract the foreign body and leave the canthus covered with small particles of lead or bismuth, and then put a patch on the canthus like a leaf of ivy.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And thus put the patch on over the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal gland into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the wound approaches the natural parts as much as the greatness of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And thus put on the bandage on one of the two angles of the codena, and scrape away the whole thing, and adjust with the suture the two lips with gut or fine thread, and stop bleeding, and make adhere whatever excess of blood remains over two eyebrows with some cause, if you wish to do so, or leave it alone.</end_of_turn>
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And thus leave the suture of the wounds within three days or four, and take care of it.</end_of_turn>
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the bandage unsutured, and care for it so that it dries and contracts, because the eyelid is raised because of the swelling of the wound and the accumulation of pus; and better leave it unsutured like this, rather than to risk infection.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in this case ask about the patient, and do what is right, and do not be afraid.</end_of_turn>
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another way of treating it is to mark on the eyelid the figure like a leaf of ivy, and to raise the eyelid with three nails separated and pressed together like this:</start_turn><end_turn>
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If this is not possible, take nails, and if they are not equal in size, take one needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and put the other thread next to the greater lacrimal gland, and the thread next to the smaller gland, and adjust between the nails of the two threads with equality, and then put your hand over the area that you have marked like this.</start_turn><end_turn
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And thus adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for it until it is healed.</start_turn><end_turn
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	However, if after this the wound should happen to swell, you must leave the swelling alone, and keep it covered, and do not touch it.</start_turn><end_turn
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in all these diseases that happen to the eyelid that cause the hairs to fall out, you must take care of them in the way that we have already said about the wound; for in this case the suture is more artificial.</start_turn><end_turn
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To suture in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you must convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside as I have recounted; and then take two needles or two fine threads of the length of the eyelid and the width of which should be less than the width of the area.</start_turn><end_turn
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already pierced at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.</start_turn><end_turn
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then gather some slight substance over the excess of the eyelid that comes out, and tighten the threads of each part with great stricture, and leave that for several days, for the swelling of the wound will diminish and will be softened and will disappear by itself when the days pass.</start_turn><end_turn
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is late, leave the sutures for a while, and care for the wound until it is healed.</start_turn><end_turn
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hair does not fall out.</start_turn><end_turn
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is the way of doing two needles in this way:</start_turn><end_turn
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And take the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.</start_turn><end_turn
Capitol .xii.	End of document.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of hair loss in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.</start_turn><end_turn
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hair is unnatural, hard and rough, and you pierce the hair, the operation in this case is that you take a fine needle and pause on that thread of silk and cotton, and that you adjust the extremities of it and keep them in such a way as to avoid any tremor.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	The length of the fingers should be equal to the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then take two fingers and join them closely, and touch the tips of those which you wish to measure
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head on the belly, and let the light of the sun be seen so that your work is declared, which is a subtle and minor operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle at the root of the hair adjusted which has needed to be made, and make that penetrate into the eyelashes fiercely until you extract that which has become loose from the natural hair
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull out the hair and put it into an ointment, and stain them with one or two or three and no more
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then pull out your hand with that which the hair has come out with ointment in the eyelashes with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Do not put ointment on the hair if it has not come out, but if it has come out put ointment on the parts beyond the finger which you have pressed with that, until ointment has come out from the wound itself.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And thus with the vision of the smell, which the hours of your instruments have smelled, and groan what must be groaned, and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair adheres to the skin and grows over that good flesh
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then adjust a hair long from the natural hair, and lift it up with that, or that you leave it until it is even with some space, and when you have elevated that
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the care of that which appears in the eyelashes that comes out.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you see in the eye something that causes irritation, and the contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its entirety, or to the right or to the left side, because of bad consolidation of pus or of ulcer or of burn, and this is called leporine, and this is either natural or accidental, and is useful for consolidating pus or ulcers or burns, or for preventing them from becoming worse
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation in this case be such that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of that eye, and keep it in that which is between those two a little piece of sponge, and tie those up until they are healed
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not neglect to take care of the causes of these irritations, restrictions; for if you do this, you will find that the pus will not return to irritate more than at any other time
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in this case that which softens like this cumin, and embroil with water in which are boiled lentil seeds or in vinegar, which is liquefied with some oil, and immerse in that the piece, and care for that
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your care is that you perform with all skill that is not consolidated in the way that we began
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have said, is nothing but the rectification of that which has irritated and has not restored the shape of the eye as it was before
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the care of that which is useful in the eyelash of the eye
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This irritation which is useful in the eyelash of the eye, which is called leporine really, is either natural or accidental
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is useful for pus or for ulcer or for burn or for other similar things
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation of this is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and fix that in the flesh, and pass the thread from the tear duct of the left to the tear duct of the right, until the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the sides of the needle and hold that with the needle, and pierce with that in a wide space
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if you return the figure of the eyelid according to what we have covered, it is not good; and if so, take the thread and suspend that in the fissured figure, and at that convert the eyelid, and make the two wounds at the sides of the outer eyelid
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two wounds be at two angles of the incision, which has been useful until they converge, and that be useful when they converge so that they make a useful figure of them
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And thus hold the flesh that amount to the width of the eye, so that you do not damage the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and bind them together like threads of yarn; and take care of those with the medicines that we mentioned before and the bandages that should be used until the patient is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it is necessary to suture or cauterize a wound, then cover that the wound is flat on the edge of the eyelid according to what has been said before.</end_of_turn>
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the nail between two lips as we have mentioned before.</end_of_turn
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the care of the alxacrati when it is detached or left, that it runs in its operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of alxacrati, and that is in the form of diverse motas.</end_of_turn>
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artists always prepare an engine in whatever way is possible for them so that they can restore the figure to its natural shape, or in any other way, and that the patient according to what is convenient for them from the operation and the instruments that are at their disposal.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.</end_of_turn>
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When these adhesion occur with many men, it is necessary to solidify the eyelid further from the edge of the eye, and to prevent the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore cover that you withdraw the iris from the pupil, and elevate it in such a way, or stretch that with the eyelash.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then incisions the adhesion with a blunt spatula, which is not of the sharpness of the incisions, having made a slight perforation so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remain that the spatula does not slip from the eye.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And that your incision be such as to remove that adhesion with ease until the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and that the adhesion is completely healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And put in the eye salt water in which you wash; or distill in it of vinegar dissolved in water.</end_of_turn
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a piece of gauze, and put over the eye a thread of yarn soaked in fat, and on the third day use astringents until the patient is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.</end_of_turn
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of the nail and the emergence of the tear ducts.</end_of_turn
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two methods, which either is nervous and is similar to a hard, soft spatula; or is non-nervous, resembling white moisture that is frozen, which when you touch it, or force it to take hold with an eyelash, is separated and the eyelash does not adhere to it.</end_of_turn
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until from the greater lacrimal duct until it gradually covers the eye and hinders vision and the movement of the eye.</end_of_turn
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	More the manner of working in the incision of the eye is that the patient rests his head on his chest, and you hold the eyelids open with your hand, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with an eyelash of little duplication and stretch that to the surrounding area.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and enter into that a hair of horse or ox or calf, or something similar, or thread, or fold the extremity of the needle little by little and leave that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and tie with thread the nail; and stretch that to the surrounding area, and remove from the skin the part of the nail that surrounds the pupil.</end_of_turn
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will keep that behind the eye.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then leave the incision in the root of the lacrimal with a blunt spatula or with small forceps, and wash the natural tear duct so that from the incision of that no liquid tears should flow continuously.</end>
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is left with the natural nail extended or with thread, as we have said, and then it is to be discharged with a lion's tongue from which this is the form of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And keep in mind that in the spatula do not touch the corneal membrane and that you avoid breaking it, and that the pupil is perforated.</end_of_turn>
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And put in the eye a little salt or a little bit of ointment made from sulfur, and wash that in the other day; and take care of that with water until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not sensitive and cannot tolerate the needle, nor is it pierced in that area, then in such a case the kind of nail is cured by medicines, and is healed just as well as if I had mentioned it and recommended it in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to cut it out, then you must open the patient and take out the acute pain with a sharp lancet in this fashion:
am subtilitat.	with caution.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes that is rare and is hidden and comes in that way, then distill from your urine in the scent of the head to make a salve or ointment or salt wash, and apply the scent within the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation until everything that is of it is removed, except that which is left in the wound, for the hour has learned that, and heal the wound at the beginning when it is healed
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation on that for this reason until it is healed
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharge from the tear duct, if you notice it in the wound for a long time, suspend it with oil; and prick that from that part, and do not finish the incision so that it does not burst tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And distill in the tear duct head or make an ointment to make it heal when it is healed
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn>
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of the nails and of what is born from an adjusted bone in the wound.</start_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some nails grow crooked in the heel, and when it covers the pupil or approaches or extends over the eyelashes and compresses the eyelashes against the margins and is gathered like a row of pyramids.</start_of_turn
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	More than that, if the patient has a great deal of pain in the groin, place your hand over the heel and collect all that bone together with nails convenient to that, and take it out with a forceps or a vessel; and prick the bone at the beginning until everything is finished with the needle, and keep your hand away from the wound so that you do not damage that which you are going to do.</start_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And the incision should be made as we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps as those which are collected together as it will be in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore when the incision is finished and all that bone is removed, then fill the wound with coarse salt or sprinkle it with powdered charcoal and keep it covered with a piece of cloth until the wound is cauterized
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains any cause of nails and it is well-nigh healed, and fears a new cauterization, then read the wound and cure that cauterization with water, and repeat the operation on that until it is healed, and in the meantime keep the adjusted bone which caused the wound of this kind.</start_of_turn
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But beware that you do not alienate all the care of the wound by natural or accidental means, or by iron, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of hair in the wound.</start_of_turn
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Hairy veins which are seen over the wound and which prevent the dressing from being put on, must be left alone for a certain number of days.</start_of_turn
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore at the beginning you must consider if the hair in which there is hair is strong and if there is no other disease which causes hair, then you must collect that hair.</start_of_turn
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his hand over the groin, and with one or two nails as you deem fit; and that nail should be doubled in this fashion:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two nails gradually in a cross as in this fashion:</start_of_turn
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And collect those veins with fine forceps, with caution, and withdraw them hour by hour until all those veins are cauterized and relaxed.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And keep in mind that you do not touch the edge of the wound; and if the operation is in the morning before sunrise, do not prick anything except those veins.</start_of_turn
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you are finished, the hour distills in the wound head or pour it out so that the acidity corrodes what is left of the hair.</start_of_turn
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	May it be so that if this is not possible at this time, then you place all your attention on what causes the pain, and keep it under observation for a few days until the pain has subsided and the cause has been identified.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat the process as the mistress commands until the patient is healed.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the way of the forceps.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xix.	Chapter xix.</end_of_turn>
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of hernias to the navel.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure hernias with cautery or acute medicine, do not be ashamed of following the narrative and not doing so when it is not beneficial. In such a case, do not do anything other than to make an incision in the apostema and extract all the moisture that is in it until the bone is exposed.</end_of_turn
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is exposed and sometimes corrupted or black, then you should grasp it with a forceps of this kind:</end_of_turn
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called rough grasp, and is made without delay, and the head is rounded thus as if pierced with a needle (as it is in the following form).</end_of_turn
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and rotate that between the thighs mentioned, and press your small hand little by little until you believe that that corruption is gone.</end_of_turn
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if there are any herbs, do the same with exsiccatives and stiptic substances.</end_of_turn
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the part is consolidated and is born well, and if the flesh is separated from the bone and remains for forty days, and is not renewed or apostematized and does not cause any accident, then you shall know that it is healed.</end_of_turn
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then you must repeat the incision to the form of the navel, and according to this manner: if you uncover the bone with cautery or acute medicine, and when you have discovered the bone, then grasp it with the forceps as follows:</end_of_turn
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The handle of the forceps is triangular, and the head is first extended into the limb thus as sometimes before.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that over the bone, and hold that of the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little further, and rotate your hand towards the inside until you have pierced all the bone, and you will feel the pain disappear as soon as you remove your hand.</end_of_turn
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore restore the part with styptic and exsiccant medicines thus as you would remove a tumor.</end_of_turn
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the part are hardened, the matter which flowed out of the wound returns to the navel, so therefore it is more likely to learn about the pain.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xx.	Chapter xx.</end_of_turn
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the prominence of the heel.</end_of_turn
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel protrudes completely and does not cause any discomfort at night or diminish, then you must loosen the pain, and keep following it, and make gentle breezes in the neck during the sacrifice; and place on the heel a liniment which is made of acacia and aloe and beeswax and plaster, and press firmly on the bandage over the heel with powdered herbs.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of the herbs is that you take lion's mane cloths with four pleats each; and make use of those herbs.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those one over the other according to the quantity of which the heel has need.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And press firmly on those with strong and strict hands; and repeat the breezes during the sacrifice; and stop the breezes and keep the heel straight day and night.</end_of_turn
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	And if the ligament is softened during treatment, keep it straight.</end_of_turn
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And keep the ligament firm both day and night as we have said.</end_of_turn
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the heel has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the bandage with the herbs and the press and the breezes until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter xxi.</end_of_turn
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the tunica uvula.</end_of_turn
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the yellow tunic [gallbladder], and it is imminent and the process is expelled beyond the eyelashes like a barley grain, and it is shaped like a man in this way, and you wish to prick it, then the operation is like this: enter the needle at the root of the yellow tunic from the left side to the right side, and then insert the needle again at the place where the double fold is, and make that penetrate and read the first needle according to its position; and then prick the place of the double fold and carry away that part of the yellow tunic in the circle of the needle, and tighten that knot.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and rest over the yellow substance infused in blood and read until the thread comes out of the wound.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the yellow substance as much as you can so that when the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And there are some who gather all around the whole part within the circle of the wound so that the imminent great swelling appears, and they perforate it with the blunt needle that comes from the belly of the wound, and run the fatty moisture, and lower the wound and put it inside quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And so tighten up until it is healed
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXXII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de alconati.	Of the care of gout.</start_of_turn>
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called gout is nothing but a swelling that is adjusted in the yellow resembling water descending and not that.</start_of_turn
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The more the work of the hand is violent in it, the more the disease makes the pain appear on the heel and go away, and if you see the healing coming to the left side, do not dry it, do not let it descend, and keep your hand over it, the disease will see its causes just as it used to.</start_of_turn
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downwards, you know that it is water.</start_of_turn
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if it is not prepared the descent of the healing with water as we have said, when the pain is between your toes, take a blunt needle and cauterize that over the nail until you see a little piece of the yellow substance left over the conjunctiva and the cornea in the crown (within the eye socket), until the healing is expelled from the wound.</start_of_turn
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore when it is expelled, then you distill in the yellow liquid cold water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled barley and honey.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And so be treated for the other causes until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXXII.</start_of_turn
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the care of the descending water from the yellow.</start_of_turn
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of the water in the division and what is appropriate to perforate when declared, when according to the healing.</start_of_turn
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Therefore you must make the pain lie between your toes over a scab and keep the yellow liquid still.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And so rest your left hand over the left eyelid, if the yellow liquid is in the left eye; or with your right hand if the yellow liquid is in the right eye.</start_of_turn
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And so take with your right hand vinegar, if the yellow liquid is left; or with your left hand if the yellow liquid is right.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And so rest the extremity of vinegar from the crown for the thickness of the ray in the yellow part of the tear duct, and then gently wipe vinegar with your hand over that.</start_of_turn
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And so penetrate into the yellow substance and sit that vinegar has already reached its purpose by reason of its heat.</start_of_turn
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And so measure the distance of the heel of the vinegar to the pupil is the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the black, which is the crown of the eye; so that you may see through that pupil with the vision of the eye for the clarity of the cornea.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And so rest vinegar in the place where the water is, and put your hand over it a little while, and therefore if the water descends quickly, the pain will go away as soon as it has covered its sight, and vinegar in the yellow substance.</start_of_turn
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And so rest a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you take back that other piece that vinegar has not been able to remove.</start_of_turn
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when it is dry and does not descend, then you easily extract vinegar, and gently move your hand back and forth, and in that dissolve in the water a little clear gem salt and in that wash the eye thoroughly; and then remove the eye from the socket or stop or bandage and put it in olive oil and blood and water and hold it over the yellow liquid.</start_of_turn
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we note that these are of our time, who pause over that same food which is served with broth of honey.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your medicine at the entrance of the heel for its hardness – for some men of whom the heel is hard like iron – then we must take the sponge which is named alberid of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore perforate at that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the wound, nor should you desist from giving the medicine until the wound has subsided.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then apply the medicine as we have said
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must praise your work, whether you prepare the patient for sleep by making them lie down in the bed in which they sleep on the seat of two in a dark room, and you must prohibit all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And rest in the nature of things so that it may be softened, and do not move the seat at all from the place where it was placed neither to the right nor to the left
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And keep the dressing according to its custom until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that from that bed and expose the cold air, and make them see some causes, and then return the dressing within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not make them drink anything at the time of the treatments or whenever the infusion is given.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	There must be enough wine for them so that the water does not irritate excessively because of its great and violent nature
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If after this accident the limb should become stiff, we must remove the scab on the seventh day, and rectify that which was done with the wine which caused the scab to form
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then remove the bandage from their eyes and rest over their face for which reason you must regulate their food for several days, because they exist in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually remove from that bed and converse with them about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in the absence of a teacher of vision, it is not excused to leave some vegetables, and when you are sure about the operation
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And so we have reached some of those whom we mentioned before, and some have said that it is done with a sponge which is dipped in honey-flavored broth.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen in our land anything like that which has been reported to us, and I do not know whether it is true in the case of some of the free men of antiquity; and it is possible that it is new
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of medical treatments so that it is about those about whom he who knows them not:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are useful for wounds of every kind, or of fire or of iron, and the extraction of their matter with this triangular substance, the acute limb just as well as the other.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXV.</start_of_turn>
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the care of wounds there is nothing in the nose
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are wounds of various kinds in the nose, which are adjusted to each other, each of whose causes is like a scorpion's teeth or like a polypoid foot; and this disease is called polypoid which is like that foot represented.</start_of_turn>
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is a gangrenous wound, ulcerated, of yellowish color; and it is like a lion's wound not of yellowish color.</start_of_turn
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of these lion wounds which are neither fraudulent nor gangrenous, we must make the patient lie down between our thighs and expose him to the sun, and wash the wound, and prick the tissue in those wounds.</start_of_turn
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the outside, and then cauterize what you have comprehended of those with the pointed cautery until you know that all the wound has been removed; for if there remains any cause of the abcess being possible, then you must retreat that which is left with one of the subtle instruments until no cause remains.</start_of_turn
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	However, if the lord rejoins with blood or if an abscess should occur from the cautery, then you must stop that; or in the case of malignant abscesses, you must cover and cauterize that until it is abcessed and all the cavities are removed.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And so keep the nose wet with vinegar or wine or water.</start_of_turn
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	However, if the nose is open and moisture proceeds from it into the palate, then you must know that it is already healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture does not penetrate as deeply as it should, you must know that what appears on the surface of the bones of the limbs is not due to an absence of disease.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore you must diligently inquire about the cause of the swelling, and do not neglect any potential cause, and stop after each touch the amount of liquid or matter which may cause discomfort or harm.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when it has been established that the swelling has occurred, then draw out the foul odor before it reaches the canals of the nerves, and when it is excreted on the surface of the foot, it is like the children do at school when they are flogged, and this is a light cause of this.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then withdraw both limbs of the body, one that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and immediately apply warm compresses to the knees of the body, and do this until you believe that the warmth has already reached the knees of the body
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the limb, and leave the opening closed with a bandage, and do this for three days or more until the wound has healed completely.<end_turn>
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, when the cause has passed, insert a lead cannula into the nose for a few days until it is healed.<end_turn>
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Even if you are diligent in your care, use this as well.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument for capturing vapor made with which oils and medicines are distilled in the limbs.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	It is made of silver or gold, which is like a small lamp with a wick, just like a wick for a candle, and the meat is similar in shape.<end_turn>
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a tube, and insert the cannula of the vapor capturing instrument and make it flat, uncovered; to which you must hold that which you will extract from the oil or water that you wish from the juices and from the causes that are subject to it.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This vapor capturing instrument is valuable: recipe of beeswax, white baler, ginger, saffron root, long pepper, mastic, and spic a taste.<end_turn> Take it with vinegar and broth, and make pills, and when a pill has been made, pour it into the limbs of the patient just before.
Capitol .xxv.	End of text.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From that time until now in the limbs of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The swelling that is seen in the limbs of the nose is not normal; it is remarkable and worthy of attention until the cause has been eliminated.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason you must immediately institute treatment as soon as the appearance of the swelling, and eradicate all of it.</start_turn>
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And immediately stop over the area or cauterize or apply a burning medicine that is in the place of it.</start_turn
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Even if the treatment is delayed until it is remarkable, consider if it is liquid, thick, of a muddy color and with little sensation, for in that case do not touch that which is the cause of the apostemas; for the swelling caused by this is very harmful to that on which it falls
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the apostema is of a yellow color, touch it gently and not of a dark color, and sometimes when the treatment is possible in all of them, evacuate the patient and apply treatment to that area until it is healed.</start_turn
Capitol .xxvi.	End of text.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by putrefaction.</start_turn
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You must know that when an accident of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little confidence is had in that operation except in the case of the wisest men.</start_turn
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it is necessary for some cause of these, consider if it is fresh plague on the surface of the wound, and immediately suture the two lips of the wound with sutures, and take care of that until it is healed.</start_turn
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the continuity have already separated and some part is still sound, you must immediately remove some part of the apparent cord until it is healed.</start_turn
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And immediately suture the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle pure salt and sesquipedalian plaster, and place over the plaster a piece of fine gauze, or some other consolidating plaster, and leave it in place for two days or three, and then remove that plaster and renew it until the wound has healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	Mays the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles just as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with fidelity just as well as you and make known.
Capitol .xxvii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.</start_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</start_of_turn
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxviii.	Mays the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles just as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with fidelity just as well as you and make known.</start_of_turn
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	When the wound has been adjusted in the groin.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care must be taken over the wound that has been adjusted in the groin, because it is prone to suppuration, so that you must suspend it with thread or by means of forceps and make an incision of sufficient length, and let the wound run or drain.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And if necessary, place over the wound a sterile dressing or other absorbent materials or excisions.</start_of_turn
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the wound returns, then immediately cut it open again, and cauterize it, so that the wound will not return.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxix.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Because of the density of bone.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the groin and of the heel and between the gums there are adjusted scales, leaves, and some veins are black and are useful for citrosis or vomiting because the gum appears to be corrupted and the teeth are loose.</start_of_turn
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore you must remove the cause of the ailment between your thighs and stop the bleeding from its root in the belly, and grind the teeth in which these scales appear to be like sand so that no cause remains that can cause decay, and that the blackening and vomiting cease.</start_of_turn
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore if this is the last time you are doing this, do not do it; but if not, then repeat the remedy tomorrow and the day after and the day after until the matter settles down in what you desire.</start_of_turn
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And remember that the teeth have required various forms of root movement and various figures according to how you prepare your operation.</start_of_turn
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the instruments with which the tooth is grasped from the groin are different from the instruments with which it is grasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of grasp must be prepared by you, which you will see both in this work and in others.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxx.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Extraction of teeth.</start_of_turn
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You must cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill and later in total eradication of it, because there is no cause that can replace the loss of it when it is eradicated, which is a sublimation that is excused in the eradication of it.</start_of_turn
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, when the ailment is urgent that the tooth be eradicated, you must firmly declare that the painful tooth is the one that must be eradicated, because many veins are deceived by the pain and believe that the pain has passed away, and you must demonstrate that it is still painful in the healthy tooth, and you must eradicate that tooth and only then will the pain cease, as we have already seen in the operation of the barbers.</start_of_turn
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore you must be certified that the painful tooth is the one that must be eradicated, and that you know well, when you have scarred around the tooth with the spatula in which there is any virtue, until the tooth is dissolved from the gum of the whole part, and you must use either forceps or fine pliers from the beginning gradually until it is complete.</start_of_turn
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And with greater force you must hold the great ones for good speech or great stupidity, and stop the bleeding from the root of the pain between the teeth that you must keep from injuring, and gently remove the tooth following the rule so that neither the pain increases nor the major pain is caused.</start_of_turn
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	Therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and put it on all parts easily and forcefully so that the evacuation is made as quickly as possible.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is cracked or broken, take care that you cover your hand with a bandage and hold it firmly at the root with your thumb so that it does not split at the time of your constriction on that part and hold it there.</end_of_turn>
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Cover the surrounding area with excessive care and sacrifice in the circuit of the whole gum and keep your hand firm so that you do not break that part and leave it loose, and return to the patient more attentively than the first pain of the part.</end_of_turn>
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And keep in mind that you should not do what ignorant barbers often do in their frenzy and daring to eradicate them, since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many sick people have reported that these doctors have caused their ailments to become more severe than before, or that they have left them with some of their roots remaining, or that they have extracted the diseased bone from the jaw just as many have reported.</end_of_turn
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the eradication of these things, wash the mouth with warm wine or vinegar with salt.</end_of_turn>
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if it is necessary to use holy water to help, just as many have reported, then take some of the holy water and sprinkle it over the wound, and if you do not confirm the holy water, cauterize.</end_of_turn
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and pliers that are usually used to grasp the tooth at the beginning is long handled with a wide thumb so that they do not bend when working.</end_of_turn
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they are just as well when the thumb is wide as when you first begin to use them, so that they are not bent when working.</end_of_turn
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are useful of Indian steel descending useful of mercury extramitted, and in the extraction of these there are teeth that enter one another and break for constriction descending strong, and some of them are in the shape of the beak of a heron which has been named ciconia, so it is wide, and strong constriction.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxi.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	About the eradication of teeth and the extraction of the bones of the jaws that are fractured.</end_of_turn
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must eradicate a tooth that is fractured, keep your hand still over the area around the tooth for a day or two until the swelling subsides; and in the meantime apply an ointment or liniment to the extraction area which has the shape of the heron’s beak called ciconia or guinea fowl, of strong constriction.</start_of_turn
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extractions are useful with lime or aloe.</start_of_turn
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey my orders with these forceps or pliers, keep your hand on the root and remove all the pulp and insert the instrument which is called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And be of short handle large a little, and do not be deceived so that it is not fractured.</start_of_turn
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if for this the root is forgotten, no; but if so, help me with other instruments of which these are the forms: the first instrument has a triangular handle in which there is some thickness.</start_of_turn
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument has a triangular shape and a more slender handle.</start_of_turn
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already with this instrument you will have two slopes of which this is the form to follow:</start_of_turn
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which I will precede in the scraping of teeth; for with this instrument which is like a great onion, this is the form.</start_of_turn
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular handle either wide or narrow, which is of some thickness, and do not be deceived so that it is not fractured.</start_of_turn
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And so it is with other instruments for teeth, which are similar to the others.</start_of_turn
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	And the wise and skillful artists in this art, according to what they mean for the operation and the various diseases; for these are the diseases for which the ancients did not say or prescribe any specific instrument, for the shapes of various species.</start_of_turn
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you are in doubt, keep your hand firmly on that in its place with the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help me with the one that has this shape:</start_of_turn
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be small at first and gradually increase in size, and let it be tightly bound or held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely healed; and then restore the area with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is small, reduce the swelling; however, let the reduction of the swelling and its blackness be gradual, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	(The text provided contains no further content after this point.)</start_of_turn>
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of prominent teeth compared to others.</start_of_turn>
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent in relation to their natural shape, and especially when this is due to the females, and more so to the venerated toes; therefore you must consider: if the tooth is not properly aligned with another tooth, and if it is not possible to file or splint it, then its root must be extracted; although it is not annexed to another tooth, you must nevertheless insert your instrument into this area with this tooth; and it is similar to the biting of a pig, and is made of Indian iron of extracted spicery sharp.</start_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be on the side where you insert the tooth, for several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and do not be like others concerning the teeth.</start_of_turn
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, let that be done with a file made of Indian iron of the same shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be of Indian iron, and the margin be well rounded; and be of little points like the file which is used for needles, so that the tooth is gradually filed over several days without damaging another tooth.</start_of_turn
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And return the tooth to its place, and reduce the swelling of the wound.</start_of_turn
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if there is a fragment of tooth that has been fractured and is lying on the tongue, let it be covered so that the expectation of that fragment is lost and it is evened out, and be filled so that the tongue does not burn or the word does not corrupt.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver.</start_of_turn
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth decay before concussion and loosening due to percussion or extraction, and the patient does not suffer from pain, and you have cared for that with medicinal treatments, and it has not been of any use, then so that they do not fall out again, gold must be used for those that are strong, and not silver, because silver turns green and soon becomes poor over several days, although gold never changes.</start_of_turn
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the gold be of such fineness and size as to be able to enter between the teeth; and the shape of the restoration is that you take hold of the gold and double it between two healthy teeth, and that you make it grow between two divergent fissures of the gold between two decayed teeth, or if one or two, until it reaches the intact tooth of the other side.</start_of_turn
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And gradually tighten the thread from the beginning of the procedure, and strengthen your hand for ease and wisdom until it is not decayed.</start_of_turn
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your diligence be such that you do not escape the roots of the teeth.</start_of_turn
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And insert the surplus of the gold into the forceps or tweezers, and add them to each place in the mouth, and convert them so that they are hidden between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue.</start_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And thus let it rest like this until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is slippery or soft, strengthen that or those with another gold in such a way that it is always strong.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two decayed teeth, as well as when these are linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or two are returned in this way near any other teeth, and they are reduced as we have recommended, and that they remain fixed.</start_of_turn
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do nothing but make good artifices and be wise.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And many herbs are suitable for various causes of bone loss in cows, and it is useful to them as a means of preventing tooth decay, and is placed in the place where the tooth is lacking, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.</start_of_turn
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	From the beginning of the ligament which is seen in the tongue and forbids that which is spoken.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	The ligament which is seen on the tongue forbids what is being said or is natural to it, or is accidental and caused by a wound which has already healed.</end_of_turn>
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	As for the operation, we burn the mouth of the wound, and if there is any tissue remaining in the belly; we elevate the tongue and then cut through the ligament along the width until the tongue is freed from its retraction.</end_of_turn>
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or swelling, and that which has remained from the wound; then when you have cut through the ligament along the width, until the swelling has disappeared.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care that there is no tear in the skin of the heel and that you cut through the vessel and let blood flow freely.</end_of_turn>
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the remnants of the incision with oil or vinegar or with cold water; and place the tongue loose; so that the one which has the patient has left the tongue in any way for that it should not be solidified again.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is bleeding, place pressure over the wound for a while; if the bleeding does not stop, then cauterize the area around the wound which is similar to hair.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes which remain until the patient is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxv.	End of Document.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Extraction of the ranula leaves the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some wounds which occur leave the tongue swollen resembling a small tongue which hinders the natural operation of the tongue; and when it is greatly swollen it is impossible to open the mouth.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	As for the operation, we burn the mouth of the wound sitting in front of the sun and consider the swelling.</end_of_turn
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if sometimes you see a yellow or black, hard one, which the patient does not feel, do not touch that which is brittle.</end_of_turn
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns white, in which there is moisture, then put on the thumb of your hand, and cut through with a sharp knife, and cut it off completely; and if blood flows at the time of your operation, then stop the bleeding by pressing the wound for a while, until the bleeding stops.</end_of_turn
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have finished treating them, until they have been washed with oil or vinegar and salt; and care for the other treatment which remains until the patient is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxvi.	End of Document.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Extraction of the wisdom tooth and that which is nothing in the jaw and of the other wisdom teeth.</end_of_turn
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the wisdom tooth is impacted, so are the salivary glands which are gathered together, and which are inflamed and are two wisdom teeth, which when you treat them with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the wisdom tooth is hard, yellow in color, without feeling, do not touch that which is iron.</end_of_turn
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of black color and the root is large, do not touch that which is iron for the flow of blood; take away that which is inside either by force, or you will break that, or it will break by itself.</end_of_turn
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, soft, and the root is thin, then that is what must be cut.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation is that you consider, before you start your operation, if the wisdom tooth has already rested for some time naturally or has decreased somewhat; and when you touch the mouth of the patient, and the head of the tooth is in the belly, and you burn the mouth, and the servant takes hold of the tongue of the patient between their hands as instructed by the instrument which is like this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it is done of silver or of gold, and is thin like a coat.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you touch the tongue and you have shown the wisdom tooth to your patient, and you have grasped that which is in the belly, then take hold of the thumb and leave that in the wound, and pull that out to the outside as much as you can.</end_of_turn
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another one which you must pull out is any cause of the membranes, and then cut that with this instrument which is like this
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is assembled like forceps, however the handles of them are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the inside of the other, not pointed, which is iron indeed without a handle.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May it be known that this instrument is not at your disposal, for the hour indicates that from this spur it must be known: that it is acute at one end, not acute at the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have indicated one side, indicate the other according to this manner of handling, and then the patient will regain from the cold water that is being poured
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Or if there is a flow of urine, guard the water of decoction of urine of millet or of marigold and remain as close as possible to the causes that cause it, until the flow of urine is restricted, and then care for that which remains that is healthy
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And every vegetable grows in the ground others afterwards when two carbuncles are made, and indicate those according to how you did and said at the incision of two abscesses engulfing.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I already treated a a woman with an abscess that was born in her groin, which abscess tended towards a dark color, with little sensation, which abscess had already closed her groin, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and I had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she was already on the verge of death if more water had not been given for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already burst that two measures of barley could fit inside where it burst out for two fingers wide
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I closed it fistulistically and remained on one of them, and I pulled out the other, and I threw out a large portion of it, and I immediately indicated that which was not included from the other side, and I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed its tongue, and I remained on the abscess with the thumb
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I immediately excised a large part of it, and there ran out only a little urine.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore it is absolutely the groin of that woman, and she immediately began to drink water, and I forbade her from eating, therefore I did not cease to indicate that abscess until many days passed, and it happened that another abscess formed in place of that one, which I indicated as long as that one was prolonged
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I went quickly and cauterized the groin of that woman, so as to prevent any further infection; and I went away and did not see her again until death took her from this life.
Capitol .xxxvii.	End of document
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Instruction for incision when it is urgent.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarr descends to the heel, and it is swollen and long, the hour it is not named perpendicular; and if it is in the outer part large and round, and the hour it is called bubble
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	May it be known that when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and you do not take care of your incision, and sometimes the abscess bursts already when it is small and soft, the hour you must know that that which is added round about is already included; and if it is in that length, and it is bloody, of a yellowish or blackish color, and is not at a distance of a finger's breadth, the hour you must fear the incision of it, for there is fear of the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you have done that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you will see that the patient is relieved and will praise your tongue with the instrument with which you proceed; and you will put that away and indicate that with two instruments which I have named at the incision of two abscesses
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you must know that you must not indicate that except when it is adjusted according to the natural measure of infection, for if you indicate it more, you will make it worse
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And concerning the incision, use the water which we have recommended at the incision of two abscesses, and care for that which remains that is healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be known that if the patient’s pain is scattered by the incision of the abscess, cover that you use an instrument in the cauterization of the abscess that your fear is not great, and the manner of handling the instrument is only with sharp water, and that you grasp the patient’s head firmly so that he does not move, and immediately take hold of the tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, and immediately take some water that we have recommended in the chapter of cauterization, and comfort that living cause, and pause that which does not spread or soften, and from that fill the hollow of the instrument that has this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Whether the limb of the curvature in which the medicine is placed is like the curvature of a ray’s heel, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the nail, the patient will lick over the lips with his tongue so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that medicine will not remain on the groin of the abscess and that it will be expelled from that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And immediately put your hand on the medicine and press that over the uvula for about a quarter of an hour until it is softened and subdued by the bite of the medicine
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, take a sponge and wet the extremity of the ray, and immerse the sponge in the medicine, and apply the ray to the sponge in a canula larger than the sponge itself, and do so until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the bladder, and then remove the sponge when it becomes dry and falls off in approximately three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you do not agree with the effect of the medicine, repeat it, and when the cauterization has finished, remove the medicine from the bladder through the urethra, and mix a little of the medicine with cold water, and let it cool, and apply a bandage, and keep it bandaged until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This method of treatment is more secure and less laborious than the initial method and is less likely to cause fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some herbs are cured by that which is more subtle than cautery and initial fear, which is cured by fumigation in this manner: take calamine, soap, origanum, rue, saffron, Arabic acacia seeds, chamomile, and barley in equal quantities, and mix them with wine vinegar, and boil; then let the vinegar cool and put a little piece of charcoal on the bottom of the vessel, over which place an instrument with an iron hook according to this manner; make a burn of silver or iron.</end_of_turn>
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And immerse the extremity in the mouth of the patient until the vapor makes the bladder rise above the navel, until the bladder is not opaque.</end_of_turn>
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat the procedure until the swelling has gone down, and take care that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an attack of stones, because it would be too strong for the stone, and would not help but aggravate the pain, but you must declare the presence of stones after performing this treatment.</end_of_turn>
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Or if you do not have this instrument, take a tube and put a plug of wax in the extremity of the limb, so that the mouth of the bladder is covered, because the plug of wax prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxviii.	The treatise ends here.</end_of_turn>
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	From the extraction of stones and of that which adheres in the bladder and of the other causes.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Swelling caused by stones adheres in the bladder or heel bone or any other cause.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must say that you have seen that there is something apparent in the bladder, for you must touch the tongue with the instrument to see clearly what it is.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the bladder, you must say that you have vomited the bladder before the food is digested in the stomach, for this is the cause which makes the bladder sore if it is not vomited; or that you have swallowed the bladder with a spoonful of broth or a bit of lettuce or a piece of bread; or that you have put a spoonful of sponge marine soaked in oil in the mouth and held it firmly in place, and when you have pulled it out you will find that the stones have been expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take a hook and drink with faith bound, and hold it firmly in place; or take a cup and drink the medicine and drink the broth.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If these causes have not been expelled, you may use an instrument of lead according to this manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And make it larger than a ray and put a cavity in the extremity of the limb which you will enter into its cavity easily.</end_of_turn>
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And keep the heel bone elevated above your head, and take care that you do not touch the bladder with your hands or with anything else, or that the physician puts his hand on it.</end_of_turn
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, when the bladder has entered, it is more painful, for its science of the location of the cause and its removal, and pulls its hand from the instrument in its place, all as much as it is prepared for it until it is expelled.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxix.	End of treatise.</end_of_turn>
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of the blood clot attached to the bladder.</end_of_turn
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood clots are treated with medicine as mentioned in the division of the treatment with medicines and not confirmed, consider the time of the bladder of the patient at sunrise, for you have compressed the tongue with the instrument which you have recommended.</end_of_turn
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if you sometimes see blood clots, extract them in small pieces or with gentle movements appropriately.</end_of_turn
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to draw out the stone with your hands, then take a curved needle and insert it into the bladder of the patient, and then place on the curve of the needle a burning iron, and do so until (the stone) is so softened that it is unable to remain in the bladder.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then prepare a sponge filled with cold water, and open the mouth of the patient with this, and wash the mouth with this; and do not swallow from this any cause and for a while move the water an hour later with your hand, because the stone has cooled down as much as the water catzed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it has not been extracted from the water that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with vinegar or by suffocating them with the instruments that we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do so, so that it will fall.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	This is another method of operation in the fumigation of this, that you take a bowl in which there are burning charcoal and cover the bowl with a lid in the middle of which is a hole, and put at the bottom of that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then withdraw the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth over the hole of the needle, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the stone, because the stone has fallen down.</end_of_turn>
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times; and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat bland foods and others, and do not drink water, and if necessary keep this regimen outside.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the stone is extracted from the bladder when it is seen; and it is similar to tweezers in this way as well as in others, but it has in it some curve:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed against the bladder, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a heron, which is hooked, in which is grasped from lime, so that when it compresses any cause, it does not yield.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xl.	The text ends here.</end_of_turn>
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the words in the opening of apices and in the section of them.</start>
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostemas are various species, of various methods, as it is remembered from their description in this book.</start><end_turn>
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and section for two methods, of which one is for the species of apostemas themselves when they are in the middle; and for what they compress of humidity.</start><end_turn
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places in which the diseases of the body occur, for example the apostema that happens in the head is different from the apostema that happens in the heel; and the apostema that happens in the fleshy parts is different from the apostema that happens in the joints; and each one of them is treated according to their operation.</start><end_turn>
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And sometimes apostemas are such that they should not be perforated except at the proper maturity of the patient in those or alongside them.</start><end_turn
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other apostemas are such that they must be grasped when they are crossed, and are not mature according to their complement, just as apostemas that are proximate to the joints, for an apostem that is proximate to a joint is prolonged until it is weak in that area, and it corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, because it is a harmful cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an apostem of a major limb, and if you delay the perforation of it when it is mature it does not benefit the major limb; or it is proximate to the heel, so perforate it only when it is not mature; and do not perforate it cruelly, except for non-compliance of digestion, but only for that which is proximate to the heel, so that you do not weaken the heel and that it is elongated to the parts of the heel, and that there is a fistula, or that it is beneficial in the end that it is not healthy.</start><end_turn
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the time of perforation of the apostema, and that is when it is mature.</start><end_turn
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it is mature when there is the cessation of pain and fever, and alongside the diminution of swelling and pulse, and the clarity of the head of the apostem, and the other signs.</start><end_turn
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that you must perforate in the place furthest from the apostem and furthest from the navel.</start><end_turn
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation should always be made along the length of the bone or limb, if the apostemas are in the parts of the feet or hands, and in the place of the lacercies, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and finally, in all those places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use perforation according to that limb.</start><end_turn
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	More than when the afterbirth is in the flesh, then it is necessary to read the puncture of the bowels until confirmed the digestion of them according to custom, as we have said; for if you puncture the preceding one of these, you prolong the course of the poor of them and cause much discomfort, and you make the lips of them scorched and the depth of them.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More than when the afterbirth is in the flesh, then it is necessary to read the puncture of the bowels according to the breadth of the bone or the body as is necessary, or according to what the member digests.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And so you must administer a small puncture, in great afterbirths a great puncture and wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the afterbirths
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of the afterbirths in which you must make the cordena concave and inflamed, when it is necessary because it is in place that it already lies, as with those that happen in dropsy and swellings.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with section having three angles; and of those it is incised as with the shape of a laurel leaf, as with the afterbirths of the spleen
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those there are those in which round section and lunar section are administered, and they resemble the others
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More than those to whom it does not seem like external leons, you must not puncture that with a superficial puncture, or plane simply.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the afterbirth is great and has collected much dirty matter, you must puncture that and do not be afraid that you will extract all of it in that hour; having extracted a part of it, and when you have put the afterbirth back into the other day, and having extracted another part greater, and having made it so that there are many soft ones according to degrees until it is forgotten
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And more especially if the illness is of cold origin, or woman with premenstrual pain, or a small child, or an old woman in decrepitude, for the animal spirit of matters resolves itself with the discharge of the dirt, and it is very well that the illness is cured, and you perform the operation for it
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter with great caution, and when you puncture these afterbirths, cover that you extract the humors and consider therefore whether the humors of the afterbirth are few or are flat sections, when you administer the former or mixed with coto of antic; and if the afterbirth is great, and the rents of the puncture are much, cover that you stay still in any place until they recover together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the afterbirth a part of the cord is torn or has been concaved in the circuit, cover that you complex it with coto old or with thread made of silk, as when you carry bread or cheese, with moisture; and strengthen that within the third day; and when you have finished that, care for that and cure the one who has suffered within that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	More than if blood flows out in the hour of your operation, cover that you administer cold water and vinegar in which a thread of silk is soaked, and pause that over the place of the flow of blood soft ones.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	More than if the flow of blood persists, cover that you administer regulation and care and powders that I have recommended in many places of this our book and division
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	More than if it is in winter, and the place of the afterbirth is a place of many nerves, cover that you cover the places with vinegar and oil caut, and pause those on the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, cover that you pause powders with eggshells with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all that is cold until the third day, as we have said, and cover that you remove the afterbirth and extract that and administer in the care of it what is appropriate until it is healed
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus it is necessary for the knowledge of the care of afterbirths universally, more especially according to the way of distinction that we have already said of every afterbirth in what manner it is to be cared for by chapters individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 61.</end_turn>
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of afterbirths which occur in the cord of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the small cord of the head small afterbirths, and they are of various knots which contain tunics that are their making; and the various ones are soft.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of those there are soft ones, and those which contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those which contain moisture resembling sponges, and resembling them; and of those which are like pebbles, hard
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all this, and in the extraction of those [intestines], there is no fear, as you must know the extension of those does not cause harm to the arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you should extract them with an instrument of the kind you see, which is called between them, until you know that it contains.</end_of_turn>
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what contains is moisture, then split that at the section according to its length by superficial section in this way:</end_of_turn>
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of the line of B to the line of G. Since when the moisture is evacuated, then you will extract that for which that moisture contains, and do not leave any cause of this, for if there remains from any cause, it will return again.</end_of_turn>
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the wound in Egyptian unguents, if present, or in water and salt; and fill that with that the wound and leave that until tomorrow, for that which is corroded will remain from that wound.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And do that again over the wound with Egyptian unguents according to the state of the wound, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that wound; for the wound will be cured with the unguents until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if after that there remains nodes of fat, then you will make an incision according to this manner:</end_of_turn
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and grasp the nails between two lips of the section and remove that from all around, and exert your virtue in the extraction of the membrane which contains that.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May it be that your artery is causing harm, but know that I will tell you that first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And thus do that in the lacation of the section and its care as we have told you; and the section over the lacation is lighter, because it is of little wound and little moisture.</end_of_turn
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And many of these wounds are of such a nature that they are in the head of such men as those with whom there is no moisture; for the cause of this is that I do not know of any wound in the head of an old woman which does not swell up like a deaf, ashen, white woman, which cannot be softened, and if there be any of those in this place, plague that.</end_of_turn
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other wounds that happen in the head, another is not like this, as for example the wounds that happen at the heads of children and you must take the reason for the earlobes, for indeed the section of these is superficial.</end_of_turn
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body of the pain is relieved in the lower parts.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And thus take care of those with what agrees with the care of that cure.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LXII.</end_of_turn>
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas which happen in the groin.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These wounds are covered with fat in the groin and in the buttocks and in the armpits; and some are found in other parts of the body.</end_of_turn
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And so those which happen in the groin, and those fat which is generated between them, and all scrofula of those is dispersed from its own membrane, and just as in the nodes and the wound of the head, as we have recommended.</end_of_turn
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are fat, for some of those are soft, and some which contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.</end_of_turn
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	So when you have good fortune in the Touchment, of which the color of the liquid which manifests is proper to the color of the codena, and is bad throughout, and is not annexed to the nerves of the groin, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not a swelling, because you must incision that which is on the surface of the part from the part beyond the body of the line of G between the line of B, and scrape that from all around, and stretch two lips of the codena on one inch, or on two fingers if you need them, as we have said in the wounds of the head, and extract that little by little.</end_of_turn
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And be more cautious that you do not cut the vein or nerve.</end_of_turn
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the sponge not be rough, that you do not put your hand on the wound, or that you ask the patient, and that you only incision what is necessary; for if you cut the vein or artery and you prevent your work, then pause in the violent bleeding or other blood clots which remain flowing from the wound, and open the wound, and leave that until the pain has subsided from the wound and the wound has become softened and has become fluid.</end_of_turn
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the patient is unconscious.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And inquire about the belly, saying whether there is any other small swelling, so that you may decide to lance them and drain them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein, cover the hour that you do not lance that swelling from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then cover that with a firm fold and keep it until it falls down by itself spontaneously.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian balsam, and care for that
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you lance the whole swelling, cover that you adjust the two lips of the wound and cause so much pus that no liquid remains superfluous
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	May be sometimes there remains some surplus of liquid because of the greatness of the swelling, cover that you understand the root of that, extract that and administer suture and that which is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that which contains humidity of the swelling, perforate that with a superficial perforation here where you see the maturation of them, and stop perforating until such time as you see pus coming from the bottom of the body, as we have said
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer perforation, cover with ointment and keep it until these are gone, so that it consumes that which is remaining from the corruption
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the wound has already healed, care for it with ointment of generative herbs until it is healed
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of excision of the spur of the heel in an accident where it causes him to limp.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	I say that this excision in the heel is done by the ancients, and no one in our land has ever seen it done otherwise
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of the sermon of these people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	May be in women there has not been any squinting, cover that the extraction of the heel be avoided, as it is not of any use for healing these things rather it may cause that all the veins and the greater part of the patient to suffer here
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	May be in those who have spurs of the heel which are caused in the mouth or limping or two on the ankle, when the disease is not in the bone, cover the use of the excision of the heel to escape the loss which is useful for perforation
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore cover that when we want to perform it, that we excise the heel leaving three circles of the circles of the heel, or four at most for the quantity, that the excision is in cartilage, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for excision because it is private of bone and the vessels of the soul are loosened from it
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, cover that he extends the tendon of the heel with oil, and then open the tendon until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of the soul if you see any cause of that.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then excise it according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the excision of the canal for the inflammation which is of that origin with that which is of the fracture and for the loosening of the voice
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, add two lips to the edge of the wound, and sew only that which is cartilage
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the bone grow until it is healed
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And thus Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposure is nothing but to see that already from these spurs of the heel the limb of the disease has been loosened, and the disease is overcome within death, and the soul from it is separated, and these go to infect the epiglottis so that the soul can breathe the disease over the place of the wound for any breath, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And thus I command you to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed; and the malice of it is for three days; and therefore I command you to close the wound when it has passed, and care for it until it is healed
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen for my part is that a servant brought a bowl and poured it into the heel and pierced with that a part of the bone of the lung, and I was called to care for it, and I covered the blood just as it is emitted from a dead man, and I uncovered the wound and covered the soul which was sitting on the wound little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I confess that no swelling or redness had occurred, and that the pain was caused by the plague, which cured as soon as the wound healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not command the servant if she does not understand, and when she has recovered she will return to her duties with greater zeal
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the section of the heel
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLV.</end_turn>
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section concerning the navel which occurs outside the belly, and is called an umbilical hernia.</end_turn>
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This navel called an umbilical hernia is great according to the color of the body, and is not in the women.</end_turn
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two methods, either it is natural or accidental.</end_turn
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one it is not necessary to cure it.</end_turn
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two methods, one of which is like grass knots, and the other method is like an abscess which is caused by the bursting of an artery, and in that case there is fear.</end_turn
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not assume it is a fever until it is great.</end_turn
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you must know that if you find it like grass knots and you do not suspect any of the veins, then you must consider that there is an abscess there and extract it from the skin and the fat; and if not, it must be treated in its entirety until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.</end_turn
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section concerning the different kinds of nodes.</end_turn
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes there are many kinds and I have already mentioned all the kinds in the division.</end_turn
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you must know that I recommend distinguishing between a node and an extrusion in order to avoid doubt.</end_turn
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an extrusion is a quality of fever, pain and violent heat until the swelling of the fluid is calmed; and it is completed by putrefaction when the fever, the pain and the heat cease.</end_turn
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node is not a quality of fever, pain or heat, but rather that which is like a stone or a sac filled with urine.</end_turn
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and it begins like a cobblestone and is like wax, both large or small, and they are of two kinds, one of which is greasy and contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have already said in the division.</end_turn
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of the node, you must expel that and inquire about the beginning of its suffering, according to the form that will come in the chapter that is next to this one.</end_turn
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiring about abscesses and all kinds of nodes, that you take this suffering and bring that which is in the center of the abscess to the most humid place that you find in the abscess, and you will remove the strings that you say until you know that the suffering has already penetrated the skin.</end_turn
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally put your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the abscesses and consider what remains of them.</end_turn
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture of any color has been expelled, then you must consider the superficial section according to what I have said concerning other abscesses.</end_turn
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture remaining from the center, then you know that it is fat.</end_turn
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it over which has the shape of a cross according to this shape:</end_turn
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	like this, and suspend that which is blunt, and remove the skin from all around easily, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract the pus from the node.</end_turn
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many veins are filled with blood, and you must extract it piecemeal until no cause remains.</end_turn
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, little or much, the node will return as before.</end_turn
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes some small part remains, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and stretch the wound, and place a caut over that which is not an abscess, and care for the other wound until it is healed.</end_turn
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is a great swelling, then touch the two lips of the patient and care for that which is nearest to the area affected.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	Even if the pulse is on the opposite side, or is not pulsating, touch the area and fill the cavity with lead that is old and rough; keep it there for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the inflammation subsides. Then remove what is superfluous from the node.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the necessary instruments in incision and perforation.</end_of_turn>
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	There are three kinds of instruments, of which the greatest is large, the middle is smaller, and the smallest.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is like this:</start_of_turn>
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middle instrument is like this:</start_of_turn
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is like this:</start_of_turn
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of ivory, of broken extremities placed in order, so that they hold the instruments in the wounds.</start_of_turn
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experts, and they are called barbers, and one of them is called a barber.</start_of_turn
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	There are three species, of which one is large, one is middle-sized, and one is small.</start_of_turn
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The large expert's form is like this:</start_of_turn
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The middle expert's form is like this:</start_of_turn
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The small expert's form is like this:</start_of_turn
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	I believe that these are for those wounds and exits and fistulas and swellings so that between these there are bones and other causes.</start_of_turn
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are round, rough, lions, geese, like large needles with which the threads are sewn, and are made of ivory, or of gold, or of iron, or of silver. The threads are when they are made of ivory.</start_of_turn
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experts of black plum are remembered that for these the fistulas are opened in the concavity of which there are reflections, which are reflected back with their elevation with those reflections.</start_of_turn
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, of which some are long, and others are middle-sized, and others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.</start_of_turn
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Black plum expert form:</start_of_turn
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Middle-sized black plum expert form:</start_of_turn
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Small black plum expert form:</start_of_turn
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of nails are of three species, of which some are simple, which have only a single curvature, and some are of three species: large, small and medium.</start_of_turn
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And there are blunt nails, and there are three species.</start_of_turn
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails with two curvatures, and there are three species.</start_of_turn
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails with three curvatures, and there are three species.</start_of_turn
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.</start_of_turn
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple nail, shape:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a middle-sized simple nail:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple nail:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a blunt large nail:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a blunt middle-sized nail:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a blunt small nail:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large nail with two curvatures:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a middle-sized nail with two curvatures:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small nail with two curvatures:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large nail with three curvatures:</start_of_turn
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The limb has three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The limb has three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and appositions are cut, and there are three kinds, one of which is great, the other medium, and the other small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Large-sized scapel shape:</end_of_turn>
Forma del scapel migier:	Medium-sized scapel shape:</end_of_turn
Forma de scapel pauc:	Small-sized scapel shape.</end_of_turn>
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those which are cut are sharp, and the others are not sharp, and they are not stopped in this manner, but rather because it is necessary to help in the excision of the nodes, in order to avoid injuring blood vessels or nerves, and for those who are skilled in surgery to restore order and tranquility through the application of which they find relief from the pain of the excision of the apposition.</end_of_turn>
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of sponges, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, just like sponges.</end_of_turn
La forma de magda gran:	Great-sized sponge shape:</end_of_turn
Forma de magda migier:	Medium-sized sponge shape:</end_of_turn
Forma de magda pauc:	Small-sized sponge shape.</end_of_turn
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are useful for blood and resemble hair in the part where they are used.</end_of_turn
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the limb pierced with a point with hidden sponge and in that which runs to the parts surrounding the intestines and outwards, when you wish, just like when you see it.</end_of_turn
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers and cover the puncture of the appositions, do not cause pain, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small.</end_of_turn
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those:</end_of_turn
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of winds with which the flow of blood is interrupted, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small; the forms of these are:</end_of_turn
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are useful for blood, round with some length, and are subtle.</end_of_turn
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And that these three kinds of winds are useful because they interrupt the flow of blood with speed when necessary, and when they are not necessary, they are not medicine.</end_of_turn
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to interrupt blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in cartilaginous places, just like in the lacerations of the veins and arteries, and in the lacerations of the bones, and of the nipples, and the belly and the armpits, and it is similar to their lacerations of the cartilaginous humors.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And many other herbs are useful for those instruments and other small things that resemble bags of seeds according to this shape; for which blood is interrupted when it is necessary for phlebotomy, or due to the incision of a vein or artery.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And many other herbs are useful in round shapes like this.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of the breasts of men which are composed of females.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some herbs swell the breasts of men who live with them because of the custom of sleeping together, and thus they swell the breasts and join the breasts of women, and remain apostemous, leaving.</end_of_turn
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to anyone who suffers from this, let him cut it with a lunar incision according to this shape, from the line of B to the line of G, and remove the whole hardness, and place a plaster of medicinal ointment on it, and tighten the edges of the wound with stitches, and care for him until he is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Or if the breast hangs downwards towards the lower parts and is softened by its size just like women, when it is necessary to divide it into two, cut it with two lunar incisions like a figure, of which each one contains the other at the end of each one, until the major line contains the minor line according to this shape of the line of B and the line of G. And remove the cord that is between two edges of the wound, and keep the swelling down, and administer what has been said of the suture and the powder that is necessary for the care until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not comply with the incision of that which you must cut for the discomfort of the patient, and for the flow of blood, let him plunge the wound into corrosive ointment and leave it until that which is rotten is removed, and care for him until he is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Capital xlviii.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Aquetz apostemas that cause it to tingle so of the species of scrophulas, thus, which contain a bag that is sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity cover that they be incised at the new moon according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when everything is evacuated from the abscess of the thigh, then you complete the wound and read it into the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And return the wound either at the end or at the beginning as convenient at that time, until it is healed
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes, and of the scrophulas, then you split over that vein as we have said in the section about the scrophulas equally
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	May if the disease is widespread in this way that it will not suffice to reduce it, then administer in it cautery as we have said before
Capitol .xlix.	Capital xlix.</start_of_turn>
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the excision of abscesses that happen by incision or by vein
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the incision is ruptured, and the cord is consolidated which is over that, then move away the vessels that accompany the abscess. It is known that inflammation and abscess are for the artery or vein: for when the abscess is for incision it is long aggregated in the precordial region; and that when you enter the abscess with the fingers, sitting in it where there is a stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is for the vein is returned to the manifestation of the body
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the excision about this abscess is an error, especially in those who leave the veins, and in the groin, and in the heel, and in many places of the body; and it is not great, therefore cover that its cure by iron should be avoided, and that which is in the limbs, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Moreover concerning that which is of its kind for the inflammation of the orifice of the incision, split the cord section in the long; and immediately put on the incision with needles and cover the incision with a dressing until it is uncovered.</start_of_turn>
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And immediately put over that needle and make that penetrate into the other side, and tighten the incision with a thread in two places, — which causes you to see two arteries broken in extraction.</start_of_turn
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And immediately put on the place that is between two ligaments with a sponge until you see the whole thing that is in it, and dissolve the abscess.</start_of_turn
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately administer care in which is engendered poverty until the ligaments fall; and immediately care that is convenient at that time until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is for the excision of a vein, then cover that you must have at your hand what is at your disposal of the abscess at the cord, and immediately insert the needle except the place where you had your hand, and make that penetrate; and be in that fold double until you extract that from the other side, and immediately ligate the abscess with a good thread as I have said above concerning the tying of two parts of the thread of two limbs.</start_of_turn
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Moreover if you fear that you will extract the thread, then immediately put on the thread with that needle until all the abscess is beyond the incision of the first needle, and strengthen the threads firmly in four places.</start_of_turn
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And immediately dry the abscess in the middle of it until when it is finished there, then you incision the surplus of the cord, and leave that which is attached to it.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And immediately stop over the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and immediately administer the care which is useful with cloths and by means of ointments until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital l of the abscess which happens for the twist of nerves.</start_of_turn
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as it happens with an abscess in incision and in a vein, and in the same way that an abscess happens with nerves when it happens to them in their percussion or happens for excessive work, and for resemblance.</start_of_turn
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is useful more of them in the places of the assistants or of the thigh, or in any place in which there are many joints.</start_of_turn
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And the abscess is difficult, and is assembled like that of the other body, and is in the greatest of them when it is stretched violently, sitting in the midst of the disease resembling stupor.</start_of_turn
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	E no es apostema agreguat in the preon of the body, and for so is left the codena, and the same is maugut throughout and does not go to the preceding or following parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is in the joints does not cover that it should be enclosed with iron, for that would strengthen too much.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May he who is in the head or in the front of the head burn the codena with a sponge.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	May he who is a little abscess, that you may then burn that which is of reason and separate that from the root
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, that you suspend it with one hand, and excoriate that, and then support that; and close the wound with sutures, and care for that until it is healed
Capitol .li.	End of text.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	In cutting an abscess that has happened from the heel that has happened to the belly
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	They are seen in the bellies of these men and in the other parts of the body of those who are afflicted with fungi, for they are similar to those that are in the fungi, from which the root is subtle and the head is great; and already the lips of these are spoken of, and it is of those that are little, and it is of those that are not magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in the belly of it were two patients who were more like fungi resembling, and there was no difference between those that were white, of slight root
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were swollen and burst, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I infiltrated those and bathed one in the foot that was painful and the other that was painful in the foot
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider if the disease is humid, and if the color of the ailment is white, humid, of subtle root; then you must burn with a sponge soaked in oil, and remain in your presence cautery in the fire, for the bubbles that are generated by the incision must be expelled without wound; and if you see that it is wound, burn that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if sometimes the disease is slight and fearful, guard you from the incision with iron; however, the hour takes faith in recent fat, and strengthen that ailment, which is that which we have mentioned; and read that for two days
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the stricture of the thread of fat; therefore, do not stop strengthening the fat greatly until it is abscised and falls off by itself
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	However, if it is of great root, the hour in the incision of it is some cause of fear and fear, especially in that which is in the belly
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Possibly you will need to cut off the greater part of it, and then burn that so that it does not return
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for that until the wound is healed
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And remember that you must not presume to cut that which is of yellow color, of little sensation, of little regard, for that which is abscess is rotten flesh.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I remember that this is recalled to me nearby
Capitol .lii.	End of text.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the care of the umbilical cord.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The umbilical cord is useful for many causes; or for fissures of the sac that is over the belly, and these must be covered with the cloth or bubble as in other ruptures; or for healing which flows from a vein or artery as is said above, or for wind that is obstructed in it
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	However, if it is for a fissure of the sac and for the swelling of the cloth, the hour the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh; and it is lion because of the pain, and it appears in various positions
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the emission of the bubble, the hour its situation is that which we have recounted, of much greater diversity, and as you promised that which is said to be hidden inside, and return it; and it is strong in it so, and it is magnificent without causing great damage or violent work
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	However, if for moisture, the hour is lion and is not hidden when you put your hand on it, nor is it constricted, nor is it twisted
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for healing, the hour at this sign appears the abscess turning black.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	However, if it is for nothing, the hour is a difficult abscess, great and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be for madness, but the time has come to touch them.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you must consider the time if the imminent danger of the navel is for the sake of surgery, or of a vein, or for madness; for in that case you must be prohibited from the treatment of it, because of fear and anxiety just as I have taught you in the chapter where I mentioned the apostemas for surgery and for vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the imminent danger of the navel is for the intestine or for the hernia, you must command the patient to lie still, and to be extended; and then I will attempt to draw out the intestines from the navel around the entire circumference; and command him to be placed between your hands over his genitals, and I will surround the area around the navel with a large swab; and extend the edge of the incision to the margins above a great extent; and tie firmly or loosely with sutures or ligatures of silk or linen.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And I will bring together the edge of the incision extended over the ligament and introduce the thumb of my hand into that place and I will push out the intestine; and if you have not grasped or retained it for the ligament, I will extract it with forceps and push out the intestine to the parts below the abdomen
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the hernia, I will take hold of it with one hand; and I will cut away the surplus of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	May it be contrary to your surgery or vein, I will circle around that area, and then return to your operation; take two needles and pierce through those two holes firmly and enter two needles into the circumference which you have made around the incision in the manner of a cross, which will pierce through; and then strengthen the incision in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles in and let the extended skin fall down by itself; or cut away that when it is subtle and falls down, and I will care for that which covers the intestines until it is healed
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the imminent danger of the navel is from nothing in it or for moisture, you must close the incision just as we have said and evacuate the moisture which you find in it, and care for that which covers and consolidates the area
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 63.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de cranc.	Of the care of wounds.</start_of_turn>
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of the different types of wounds and how to treat them with medicines; and it is foolish to treat them with iron so that they are not ulcerated; and we have said that wounds are generated in the spring and the caution in the treatment of them
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And I say that many wounds that are seen in the groin are in places where it is impossible to eradicate them, just as well as wounds that are in the breasts or in the buttocks and to whom it is appropriate to allocate all those that are away from the limbs to extract all of them, and more especially when they are starting small
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and is thick, do not think that you will be able to heal it; for I have never seen that it is healed by any plaster or other thing, nor that it is healed by any other means.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in this case is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and remove the patient and purge with black bile some herbs, and I will sprinkle that, if it is found, and replace it openly
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And I will prepare the patient with the preparation in which he is located in the operation, and I will order in the incision a number of pins which will cover that; and I will compress from all parts with the codena so good pressure that no cause of the causes of the wound remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And leave run the wound, and do not close it hastily, and press the edges, and dry the wound thoroughly with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal of instruments
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May it be contrary to your will of great surgery or of vein, I will cauterize that as soon as the flow of the wound is stopped, and I will care for that which remains of the other treatment until it is healed
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 45.</start_of_turn
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the care of hydropic tumors.</start_of_turn
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the species of hydropic tumors of water, and their signs, and how to treat them with medicines
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althites alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanists or to the species of yposarcha, which is deadly
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this kind of tympanitic hydropath by medicine and have not relieved the pain, then know that if the patient has already achieved convalescence or another disease is present, just as in them or in the chest and resembling these, then do not administer iron, for fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If the patient sometimes suffers from excessive vomiting, and it is not another disease but merely hydropath, neither young nor old, then know that the method of operating for this is to elevate the patient's belly with your hand, express the contents of the belly into the pan, fill the cavity with water up to the level of the fifth rib, and then take sponges as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	... of two sharp points long, like sponges; however, make them somewhat smaller in each part, so that in the process of operation nothing enters the intestine, and that you avoid that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of hydropath is from the bowels, for in this case you must make an incision from the navel to the extent of three fingers below the ribs, on the side towards the fifth rib.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydropath is from kidney disease, then make the incision to the left of the navel for three fingers
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation is from the spleen, then make the incision in the flank
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make the incision over the ribs where the patient is vomiting, for fear of damaging the surrounding organs
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And pierce with all the instruments. Enter into the incision and elevate your hand with the sponges between the cord and the liver, and extract it; if there is the quantity of a nail or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And pierce the liver until the sponges reach the cavity of the water
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And remove it and insert an instrument that has this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	... it is like a silver needle with a small hole at the lower end, and three holes on the sides: two on one side and one on the other; and the extremity is blunt like a pen, as sometimes happens
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the extremity there is an arm, which when the instrument comes into the water, immediately releases so much water that if you evacuate less than that in an hour, it is more harmful to the patient for the resolution of the spirit animal, or for injuries to the fifth pair of ribs, which is very close to death
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate in this way according to the quantity of the vomit and according to what your experience tells you about the patient's vomit and the extent of his illness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And remove the instrument. Keep the water that causes this because it is retained by the cord that retains the hole that is on the liver, and recommend that you perform this in the same way
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the process the next day if sometimes the patient tolerates it, and extract only a small quantity of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and keep watch that there remains no water left except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear about the patient, and see a great quantity of water, then care for that which is buried in fine sand, moisten his clothes in bath, and wait in the sun for a long time; and care for that which has dry medicines until it is healed
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, the liver and the spleen during the evacuation of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	The treatment ends here.</start_of_turn>
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Concerning the care of children who have not yet opened their bladders.</start_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children excrete through the belly of their mother and the head of their urine is not perforated (or is slightly torn or is not in its place).</start_of_turn
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore it is necessary to cut as little as possible and as gently as possible, according to this method:</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And immediately stop the bleeding with a plum nail and ligate it, and keep it for three days or for three quarters of a day.</start_of_turn
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he wants to urinate, he will be able to urinate; and immediately return that.</start_of_turn
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the nail, it is possible that the urine that has gone over the place will not leave this opening.</start_of_turn
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The suffering from which he complains is severe, both from the physician's point of view and from that of the layman. It is customary for us to call it "gout" when the pain arises from cold humors which penetrate all parts of the body, and when it affects the feet. If it is necessary to make incisions on the surface of the foot, let this be done with a pointed cautery. Reduce the swelling or tumor to its concavity, and keep your hand over the place to prevent the tumor from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. The cause of this patient's suffering is that the stone which is causing the pain is straight and requires treatment with a plum stone, as we have already said, for in a few days it will be amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	The stone which is causing the pain is not in its proper place, that is to say, the cause of this is that the stone, which is natural, cannot pass through the urinary tract because of the swelling of the bladder, until it is elevated by the hand to the parts below; and this is not due to its origin, for so the sperm cannot reach its height following the rule, and this is an illness of the bladder itself.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of performing the operation is that the patient should be placed on his side, and extend the head of the bladder with your left hand with violent extraction, and puncture the head of the bladder at the place of the periformis with a pointed instrument, as with a needle, or that you make no incision, for so that the membrane of the bladder returns to its normal position and the stone falls into the proper place as it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember that in your surgery of flux of urine, that no other matter happens; and pause for a while until the urine has stopped flowing, and care for the wound until it has healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 65.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the swelling which occurs in the prepuce in the head of the bladder and of the corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the bladder.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	These matters are observed to cause this swelling in the bladder and is an ailment of the bladder itself
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those two, one is malignant and the other is not malignant
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, because you suspend it with one finger and drain it when it is soft; and you pause over that area submerged in Egyptian unguent; and do the same with the other, care for it until it is healed
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malignant, of dark color, then you must administer cautery nearby the incision and in proportion to the severity of the ailment
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Moreover, if the swelling is in the prepuce of the head of the bladder and is not circumcised, and one part of the swelling is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then you must know that the swelling which is inside must be treated before it is solidified; and as for the other, care for that which is outside, for when you care for that which is inside, you are not sure that the prepuce is not torn
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And already there are seen to occur swellings in the genitals and in the prepuce, blackness and corruption, where you must conquer all that is already decayed and which is about to corrupt or which is already corrupted; and for this you must apply pressure over that area with a mixture of lead and flour of a thousand grains and of coarse chaff and millet.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And care for the other with the other care until it is healed
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Moreover, if there is a flow of urine, then administer lunar cautery in this way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because the healing cautery is at two positions together, that is to say, for the flow of urine and for the wound when it is corrupted
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the bladder is corroded and is destroyed in an hour, then you must introduce into the body of the prepuce a a plum catheter so that the patient can urinate through that
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the bladder (and this adhesion does not occur except in that of which the prepuce is soft, and over which circumcision is not required; and when it occurs from ulcer or from swelling) you must scrape with a blunt instrument until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the bladder is freed in its entirety
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove them, you must scrape with a blunt instrument over the whole of the head of the bladder and the prepuce, and thus when the prepuce is soft, strong as it is, it is perforated by its softness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And keep the prepuce separate from the head of the bladder with a thread of silk, which already lies wet in the running water so that it does not adhere to anything else
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And care for it with vinegar until it is solidified<end_turn>
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 67.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the circumcision of children and the care of what occurs in those who have undergone circumcision.<end_turn
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not merely a solution for continuity in this way as with other plagues: more importantly, as with our operation and our will, it is necessary that we assign in this better operation and way more weight lest we lose health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not say circumcision in any of their leisure times, for they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have learned through experience that it causes more harm than good that they now resort to circumcision and mutilation for boys; and they do so with thread that is strong and with an incision at the nail.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I myself have tried all these methods, and I do not approve of any mutilation with forceps, thread that is strong, or with an incision at the nail; for these methods often cause the codeon to flee further, since the codeon of the prepuce is split into two tunics, and the tension is left behind, and it is very strong.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And as for the digital mutilation which is useful for alphbetism, and which is practiced by barbers, it is not followed by the incision of the extremity of the viril member, for it is very painful there.</end_of_turn>
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	More in the operation with the nail, one must observe great care and corrupt your operation.</end_of_turn>
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the codeon of the child is short by nature, and often these veins are not harmed in this way that necessitates mutilation, and I have seen this myself.</end_of_turn>
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the mutilation that is done with forceps and strong thread, experience teaches me that the pain, when it is excessive, both that which comes from the incision and that which remains after, is just as great as before; and therefore when you promise your hand so that they are provided in two equal parts, and you make the incision according to a comparison at a certain time, it is useful to compress the thread with a figure that contains the codeon of the radix of the whole part, so that there is no error in this.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first way of operating is that you must keep the child quiet if he is young, and do not do anything but tightly bind the thread to his radix only, and that you watch over him until the next day.</end_of_turn>
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And thus you will please that in every way that is possible to you that he receives his intelligence.</end_of_turn>
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And thus you will please that your hands should be poised prepared, and do not be absent-minded; and conceal the forceps in your hand or hold them in your palm, so that the child does not see them or any other instruments.</end_of_turn
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And thus place your hand on the radix of the member and blow into the codeon, and pull out that which is added to it by habit. And thus mutilate that which is added to it by habit.</end_of_turn
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And thus tie the marked place with strong thread doubled, and then tie another little one below that one, and then put your thumb and index finger over the left side of the wound and indicate the place where the thread should be left, and make the incision between two threads.</end_of_turn
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And thus lift up the codeon gently and pull out the head of the radix; and then read the wound carefully, for it is better; and stop powdering over it and put on a bandage on the powder where there is scattered mucus with congealed blood in oily cloths with fresh olive oil; and leave that on until the next day; and care for it until it is healed.</end_of_turn
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The way of the forceps for mutilation, this is the way:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The outer handles should not be too wide and the inner handles should be as wide as the thumb and index finger together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More of an error in mutilation is that it causes the intrinsic codeon to flee completely, or parts of it must be excised from the incision.</end_of_turn>
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore you must extend that of your hour with your nail before the apostemaction of the place and that you make the incision according to equality.</end_of_turn
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, the hours extract that with a forceps and make the incision.</end_of_turn>
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	More if three days have passed and the swelling of the radix remains left after the removal of the caut, the hours read that it is conceded that the swelling has gone away, and remove that which is necessary, and make the incision as you are prepared.</end_of_turn
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And take care of the head of the radix, so that it does not suffer from it.</end_of_turn
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore treat that which combines with the swelling of the boils which we have recommended in the treatise on boils.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is indicated on measurement, and you obey the parts mentioned, then do not neglect them.</end_of_turn>
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And stay away from that which we have already said is healthy.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.</end_of_turn
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retained urine in the bladder is caused by excessive fullness from stones or sand, or by weakness or spasm, or by poverty or meat, and it is to be treated in the same way as those which we have mentioned in the division.</end_of_turn
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see that the retention is due to stones which are already in the bottom of the bladder, then you must support the patient over their flanks.</end_of_turn
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And put the feet of the patient over the flank and extend the flank from the part below the flank, and the patient should squeeze the flank as much as possible.</end_of_turn
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore when the bottom of the bladder is squeezed, the stone will be driven out to the back parts, because the urine is expelled.</end_of_turn
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as we have said, and the cause of the pain is not known, then you must administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which is made like this: of silver or gold, with a tube like a needle with a long handle like a palm, to which is attached a balloon-like bag at the tip.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting the urine is as follows: grasp the loop of the cord doubled and bind it at the base of the bladder with a good knot; insert the loops of the cord through the opening of the catheter, and pierce the edges if there is any cause of swelling, but do not insert the needle into the bladder with force. And then increase the catheter with a border and an egg-shaped bag.</end_of_turn
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on the edge of the bed, and bandage the bladder and the surrounding area with oil and olive oil, and oil of olive and vinegar.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter easily until it reaches the root of the bladder; then bend the bladder downwards to the part below the navel; and then grasp the catheter with your fingers; and grasp the catheter again when it reaches the bladder, and that will cause the patient to urinate; and this is not good in this order, but it is good in the part where the pain comes from.</end_of_turn
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually pull out the cord with the thread, so that the urine fills the bladder.</end_of_turn
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And extract that and treat the urine, and use a catheter, do not stop until the bladder is empty and the pain is relieved.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.</end_of_turn
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of the bladder wash with a clamp and the instruments which are suitable for it.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or if it is constipated by urine, or if there is a coarseness of the bladder wall, and if you wish to drain urine and medicines, then it is necessary to use a clamp. This is how it is made:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Except that in the extraction it is deaf, so it is closed.</end_of_turn
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three parts to it: two of the one side, thus twice.</end_of_turn
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is liquid, in which is the thing which is enclosed, and as much as it fills that, so it is added, until when any cause is overcome by that which is drawn out of the humidity, that is thrown away, and when it is expelled, that is thrown away, and when it is expelled long, according to how much the clamp has held naptha in the battles of the sea.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore when you wish to remove humidity from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and draw out that urine which is enclosed in the parts above, because the humidity is expelled in the concavity of the clamp.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the bladder according to what we have recommended in the catheter; and then grasp the humidity with that urine which grasps, because that humidity goes to the bladder as much as possible, and the pain is relieved thereby.</end_of_turn
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the crystalline substance which is crystallized in the bladder, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And that is either silver or lead, of which the head is neither more nor less like a small feather, and leave it hanging limp.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And immediately take the bladder from its motion, and stop when the humidity you want to crystallize in the bladder is at hand, and then bind that between two strong ligatures made of strong thread, and scald that humidity over the fire
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And immediately put the extremity of the crystal into the vinegar.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And immediately put your hand over the bladder with the humidity as it is stretched out so that the patient does not feel that the humidity has already reached the bladder
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	Even if the bladder is not present, when you take a piece of barley and make a circle of it; and pierce that through all its roundness; and immediately insert strong thread firmly into those holes, even though they may be twisted; and immediately gather the circle as if it were gathered to the bath, because you have placed your hand over that water which you want to expel from the humidity, and smell and water
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And immediately tie that on the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity has reached the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	End of document.
De extraccio de peyra.	From the extraction of the stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between the stone engendered in the phlegm and the stone engendered in the bladder, and we will tell you of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said the stone in which catz operation is made with the hand, and section
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone engendered in the bladder itself is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And thus we have narrated this exposure and summary
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the stone most commonly seen in children; and of its signs is that the urine which comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient has frequent pain in his belly, and large and soft masses appear, and it is dressed; and in that water lies the root of the stone among those masses.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is strange the healing of children from that until they have reached the age of thirteen; and it is difficult to cure them in the old ones
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	For in the young it is easier because it is among those things.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And concerning that from which the stone is greater and the cure is easier; and if it is little, it is contrary to that
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we come to the cure of that, cover at the beginning of that which modifies the patient's pain by means of the crystallization which extracts all the wound which is in the marrow; for that wound many soft masses prevent the poisoning of the stone because of the inquiry of those things
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And immediately make the patient sit with both feet on the ground and with both hands raised up so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or that it may jump out of its place by some soft masses.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And immediately do that which will break between your thighs prepared, and the greater part of them leave the cushions of their thighs, so that the whole bladder will be made to lie down declining to the parts behind
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And immediately request that and all that is around it
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately cover both hands over it with a section.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel it at all, leave it touching only with your thumb, if the patient is a child, or say half if it is an adult, and put that on the buttock
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And request the stone until it is left touching your thumb
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the mouth of the bladder
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And immediately put your hand over that which you touch, and expel that to the outside of the body where you saw the section
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the minister to hold the bladder with his hand; and command another minister with his right hand to extend the thighs to the sides, and with his left hand to hold the fold which is left by the thighs, at the part where the section was made
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And immediately insert the sponge be incidental of which this is the form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And split it open in that place where it is between the hip and the groin, not in the middle of the thigh, toward the outer side of the left thigh; and let the incision be over that bone and the testicle which is said to be in the hip, and make a transverse incision, for the incision outside must be wide enough and not too narrow according to the amount that comes out of the bone, and not more, than which would firmly compress the testicle which is in the hip where the bone was cut.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from the bone there is some angle and margin, for that its essence is difficult to cut for that reason.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that which is like a claw, it is round, and it is difficult to cut because of its smoothness
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if that which has angles and margins fits into the fracture
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus firmly held, that you must keep your hand over that, or that you must tightly bind that with your hand which is over the bone, and do not neglect that; or that you must put inside the instruments that curve the extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Or if you cannot do that, then you must slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see flow of pus, cut away that which is yellow and slimy
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Or if the bone is more than one, then at the beginning you must place your hand at the mouth of the bladder, and then you must cut over that; and then you must place a little sponge there; and in the same way do if there are two bones more
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the bone is great, it is known that you must not make a great incision, because that would cause harm to the patient by causing two evils: either that it would remain or that it would cause continuous discharge of urine, because the limb is not completely consolidated
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And administer the expulsion from within that it is evacuated, or engineer in the fracture of the bone with the forceps until you extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe leaves and dragon's blood, and bind that tightly
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And keep over that bandage soaked in oil and vinegar, or in oiled rose oil and fresh water, so that the afterburn is softened.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And let the patient rest on the seat of the couch, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been removed, bathe the limb with water and oil, and then care for that with ointment of diafinicon and diabezicon until it is healed
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Or if in the wound there is afterburn, adhere and corrode, and that which resembles that as if the urine is frozen in the bladder, and for that the urine is prohibited (and that is known as the evacuation of the urine along with the semen), therefore remove the testicle which is in the wound and extract that semen, because if it remains it will cause the bladder to become corrupted and putrefy
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And finally wash the wound with wine vinegar, water and salt, and against all spices, against all that may impede its healing until it is healed
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And keep in the hours of all the care that you lie both thighs together and adjust the medicines that are placed over the limb.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the bone is small and is in the marrow, and is fixed there, and the discharge of urine is prohibited, then know that you must cure that as it is recommended above that for this care, because those who do not take care of this will be accused of cutting; and indeed I have seen that for this reason they bring a needle of iron to the point.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Of triangular shape, extracted from the gut, fixed in the flesh
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take care that the gut does not slip back, and keep that part of the marrow outside the bladder so that it does not return to the bladder again.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And finally remove the iron from the marrow, perforating easily until the perforator comes to that bone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand over that small bone, and you will pierce the perforation of it until you have pierced that of the other side so that the urine can flow freely
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And put your hand over that which remains of the bone from the part of the marrow, which is broken, and is filled with urine, and the patient is healed
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Or if this care is not pleasing to you for any cause that prohibits it, then know that you must tie a thread around the bone and another thread outside the bone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then ignite over the stone in that furrow between two bands.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that.</start_of_turn>
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the ligament and support the wound with a bandage, which is useful in the plague.</start_of_turn
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to ligate the tendon, but rather because it does not return to the bladder, and the other tendon must be detached, for when the tendon is detached near the expulsion of the stone, the codena returns to its place and heals the plague.</start_of_turn
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason when you detach the tendon, that you elevate the codena towards its source, or that it returns backwards towards the belly, and heal the plague in this way.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of a stone from the thighs.</start_of_turn
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in the thighs is rarely generated.</start_of_turn
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if it is seen that there is a stone in any of these, the healing of which is difficult, and is prohibited by rough methods.</start_of_turn
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the strong thigh is verges.</start_of_turn
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the other is that you do not find the thigh to be sound if you thrust your finger into it when it is cold, or if it is the thigh having marrow.</start_of_turn
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find the thigh to be aware of this art, mainly the operation with the hand.</start_of_turn
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth is that the location of the incision concerning the stone in the thighs is far from the location of the stone, for it is dangerous to make an incision in vain, and in that there is fear.</start_of_turn
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if it is necessary to provoke this, the hour cover that you grasp a large thigh that is sound, and little is found.</start_of_turn
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you lack these, near the matrix cast or present a matron thigh that is softened in the field, or a thigh that in this art has become detached from the bone.</start_of_turn
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore do that which is presented, and command her to do everything that you order her, from the inquiry about the stone from the beginning; for it regards whether the thigh is verges, the hour cover that you put all that you said at the end of her and wants the stone.</start_of_turn
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you find that, cover that and the hour command her to make an incision over that.</start_of_turn
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not verges, the hour commands the matron to interpose all that you said in the belly of the patient and grasp over the stone, since it pauses her left hand over the bladder, and press that with good pressure.</start_of_turn
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if you find that, the hour cover that gradually move that from the orifice of the bladder towards the lower parts until it reaches the level of the cushion.</start_of_turn
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then make an incision over that support of the belly that is at the level of the cushion of whatever part it may be that is stopped and center the stone in that part, and do not move the hand of the patient with the stone together with her.</start_of_turn
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision is little at the beginning; and then interpose the sponge over that incision, and if you feel the stone, the hour adjusts in the incision according to the quantity that you know that the stone will be ejected from that.</start_of_turn
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the species of stones are diverse: because some are little and great, and lion and rough, and long and round, and have ramps.</start_of_turn
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species there are of them for which you sign concerning what you want.</start_of_turn
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see flow of blood, adjust in the old wound three fingers and stay there for an hour until the blood is clotted, and then return to your operation until the stone is ejected.</start_of_turn
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make that you have ready all the instruments that are said in the extraction of stones in women, so that you are helped with them in your operation.</start_of_turn
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of the blood is from the vein that is cut, the hour you suspend powder over the area and open that with powder and stricture descending, and do not do anything further; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for it may cause the death of the patient.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua.	And promptly treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the acute pain has subsided a little, the limb should be returned to its normal position, and the doctor returns to his work before the stone has been expelled.</end_of_turn>
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of the incision concerning an hernia.</end_of_turn
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is simply an accumulation of moisture in the white sac which contains the intestines, and is called a hernia.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And every woman has in her own belly what nature has prepared for her in the part of the intestines, except that which has already gone; and this is the codena of the genetius between the white sac which we have already mentioned, and it is not simply water.</end_of_turn
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is because of excessive pressure which happens to the genetius, because of which this matter is infiltrated there; and sometimes it happens by a violent blow inflicted on the genetius.</end_of_turn
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors, for its color may be yellow or greenish or bloody, or even black fetid, or white liquid, and this is the best.</end_of_turn
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which this accumulation of water is recognized are these: for if it is in the white sac which we have mentioned, when it is expelled it appears redon declining a little in length like a figure of water, and the genetius appears, for the moisture contains all around.</end_of_turn
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the belly, when it is expelled it appears redon towards the part of the intestines and thus we believe that it is another hernia.</end_of_turn
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the genetius and the white sac, then leave it alone.</end_of_turn
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then express the color of the moisture from the expulsion along with the drops that precede it; and according to what comes out with the drops, judge of what is its origin.</end_of_turn
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of this we must command the patient to be flexible if possible, and sometimes to lie down.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And immediately put two cushions under the hips on any occasion, and hold still for a while.</end_of_turn
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And immediately place your hand on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who will extend his hand from the hip bone to the groin and to the part below the navel.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And immediately take hold of the patient's hand and make an incision from the hip bone to the middle of the foot along the length of the thigh.</end_of_turn
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made according to the rule at an equal distance from the line which should join the skin of the genetius, until it reaches the white sac including.</end_of_turn
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And drain away that, and observe, and take care so that you do not break that; and your incision should be made with such care that it be suspended with the greater vessels and be written smoothly along the incision according to your ability.</end>
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And immediately pierce the full belly with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.</end_of_turn
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And immediately separate between two layers of the incision with scissors, and stretch the sac downwards; and do not touch the genetius bone including, and pierce the sac in such a manner as you are able.</end_of_turn
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And pierce it entirely or in pieces, and more especially the flanks which if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of these, it will not be safe that the water does not return.</end_of_turn
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	More than if the water comes out from its belly in the hour of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the sac, return that which has come out, and immediately suture the two layers of the genetius skin with sutures, and take care of this as well as the others.</end_of_turn
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the water corrupted by another disease, then cover that you close the blood vessels which are sore the hangers, and extract the water, and take care of this as we have said.</end_of_turn
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	More than if the water is accumulated in two parts, it is known that these are hernias; therefore pierce that part as you have done with the other equally; and if it is your opinion that this is an operation, then do it.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccions lana submersa in olio o in olio rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa in vi e olio, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius et li mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz et pulvils, et lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon ista forma:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then withdraw the bladder or hernia back into its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the bladder from bursting. And take two sheets and fold them with the coarse side inwards, and put the extremities over the parts which are painful or swollen with fat or moisture. And join the edges together with a suture in such a way:
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And every wound of this hernia is treated artificially with cautery in place of incision with a knife; and that you take cautery of the pointed kind and insert it into that place where the cord of the thumbs is, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white sac containing the urine is discovered, and then you take the cautery in this way:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that sac with that, and ignite it until all the moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then stretch out the sac with nails, and scrape with nails, and scrape with pointed cautery; and make an incision according to what is convenient until you have repaired everything; and keep your hand away from the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more saving and more lasting than an incision with a knife.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	May it be contrary to your expectations that the after-effects of cautery should be delayed in the case of incision or at the time of cautery, or of flux of urine; however, you must know that you must care for whatever discomfort arises from this, with the care that is appropriate for it according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	May it be that the patient is poor, and does not expect a second operation because of its horror; however, you must administer perforation as we have recommended when it is certified that this is necessary; and it is confirmed that this is indeed the case, as we have said concerning the significance, that this hernia is harmless.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	You must know that you must fasten the patient on any elevated surface, and perforate the after-effect in the lower part of it towards the heel, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And the opening should be wide enough to allow all the urine to drain out
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand over the area around the hip and join it to that, so that no urine remains there
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care of it until the wound is healed
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	May it be that at the discharge of the urine in that hour you perforate that; and that which is not useful except that the white fluid in the opening of the wound makes it uncomfortable and prevents the passage of urine, you must know that you must put in the wound a little or an instrument with which the urine is extracted from the testicles, in the way that is preceded; or adjust in the oppression of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the urine returns, and is restored about six months or in the spring of those; and when it is restored, the perforation should be made according to that same manner, so that the patient may pass the days without suffering
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 163.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of incision concerning carbuncular hernia and its treatment.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You must know that in the incision concerning this hernia there is great fear of loss of sensation in the major parts; for I have seen its dismissal and its being saved in that way.</end_of_turn
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation concerning this and the species of after-effects.</end_of_turn
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore I say that the after-effects arise in the bodies of those in whom the thumbs are composed and are useful for many causes: or for sudden excess of liquid which is spread over the thumbs, or for percussion.</end_of_turn
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the after-effect is according to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and is a difficult after-effect.</end_of_turn
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And it is known that the after-effect is bloody, of which the color is dark, and is not harmful to it.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some say that it is useful for the swelling of the arteries, and for the inflammation of those which have already been perceived, or for the inflammation of veins.</end_of_turn
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The swelling of the joints is known as gout when it is caused by the discharge of purulent matter from the bladder when it is compressed in the abdomen. It should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	That which is caused by the swelling of the veins is not known to be dispersed in any way by the compression of these things.</end_of_turn>
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that the cutting of this kind will be useful on the other flesh; and that you should insert the codpiece into the genitals, and hold out the hair from the parts below, and extract that from the white sac, and discharge the lymph from the veins, and close them, and cut off the lymph that you discharge from all parts of the hair.</end_of_turn
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the blood is already clotted in those veins, then you must extract the blood and insert the codpiece.</end_of_turn>
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adherence between any cause of the sac, or between those that are between the veins, then you must discharge all that adherence and insert that by incision around.</end_of_turn
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is born from flesh at the place of the adherence which is behind, then you must insert all that is of it, and extract the blood as we have said.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with soft wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and take care of the other care of it until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 144.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the care of hernia which is of wit.</end_of_turn>
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The wit is purulent enclosed by any covering resembling a sprout with mollification of the testicles, and it is difficult for the patient to exercise and walk about on the patient.</end_of_turn
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the care of this disease it is to be feared from what precedes the memory.</end_of_turn
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However we must say the operation in which the first things are fierce.</end_of_turn
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that you must make the patient lie on a high cushion; and hold out the lymph from the testicles to the lower parts; and insert the codpiece into the genitals with the veins which are proven to the groin; and have those other attendants whom you please, and extend those with violent extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And insert with a blunt knife quickly through an incision across the vessels until they are discovered.</end_of_turn
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And extract from all parts as we have said previously in the extraction of the bladder which are in the temples.</end_of_turn
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And leave in those one a needle which is faithful to the double, and tie one at the first place in the places where the wit happened, and tie the other thread at the back of them.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And insert those in the middle of the body for a transverse incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is added of the foul and corrupt humors.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And take care of the wound with the care of the other wounds in which you wish to generate so that the veins which would otherwise be injured by two testicles do not suffer.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	However if the wit has happened to all the veins, then you must extract the testicles or that the testicles because of the veins will be emptied of all nourishment, and will be solidified, or that they will be so that they are not useful to those things.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 155.</end_of_turn
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the care of intestinal hernia.</end_of_turn
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by section that extends over the abdomen from the flanks of the belly button, so that the intestines of that break are given to some of the intestines.</end_of_turn
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the sac or of excess of it, and it happens for various causes: or for percussion, or for vomiting, or for crying, or for elevation of any serious cause, or for some other reason.</end_of_turn
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is for the extension of the sac, is that it happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and is purulent within the belly so that the sac compresses the intestine.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is for the section of the sac, that at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is purulent outside the codpiece which is apparent, and that is for the bursting of the intestine, and the body of the hernia to the edges of the sac.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Every wound outside the belly is forgotten about with the hernia of the intestines.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Every wound is forgotten with the swelling of the intestines, for some wounds go into the belly through an opening, and here it is retained, and this is great discomfort for the patient, and some wounds cause great pain, more when they are moved.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this disease, fear is present, for it is believed that the infection may escape from the treatment in this way.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of performing the operation for this is that you command the patient to reduce the belly to their hand to the parts between the toes of their cavity if they obey your order, and then be covered over with a cloth between your hands, and elevate their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then clamp the cord which joins the testicles to the parts below, and cut the cord of the testicles throughout; and then quickly close the wound in two layers as you would to open the wound with these things
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if it is possible for you according to the quantity that you are able to do that from that will be forgotten
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove the clots which remain from cutting the cord of the testicles, until the white hard clot of some part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you will enter the belly as it has been said concerning the testicles, that is between the white clots, which is left from the cord of the blood, and between the clots following, and remove that adhesion which is in the back of the blood
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then make the cord of the testicles limp by the hand, and with the left hand extend the white clot towards the hand, and elevate the blood towards the part of the wound; and command the minister to extend the blood outwards and you will dissolve the adhesion that is behind with the solution completed
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And inquire of the patient that they do not suffer from any cause of the belly being covered with a white hard clot
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	Maybe if you find any cause, then you will leave it in the belly
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And take a needle in which there is faith that it will make four threads, and enter that one must give behind the clot, which is under the cord of the testicles, which has been cut; and then cut the extremities that you have sewn together until they are four threads, and then tie a knot on each of them in the manner of a cross; and tie that to the clot from which we have said that the cord of the testicles is left with strong thread of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then you will wrap the extremities of the threads and tie them securely so that no blood vessels that run through them can cause any cause so that from here no infection arises
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And leave another wound ligament for three lines more; and then join two threads which lie on the belly which is left from the cord of the testicles as much as the size of the thumb, and cut all the rest according to the roundness, and leave the blood in them
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut in the back of the cord of the testicles for the cutting of which has been recommended as we have said before.<end_turn>
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer lard submerged in oil, and leave it on the wound; and administer the thread which we have recommended (and some wounds the white clot is cauterized, which we have said above concerning the fear of the flow of blood, for many wounds happen in this way).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the case is delayed, the cold water should be bound, and leave it on that until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the wound with the other care of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66
De hernia ventosa.	Of intestinal hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia nothing is seen that has been done regarding its treatment with fear.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first say that it is useful just as we have recommended in the hernia that is in the belly; that is that you tie the blood vessels near the incision in order to facilitate them; and then dry in the middle space around the feces so that the infection does not occur in that area until the blood vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Care for the wound as we have said until it is healed
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disruption that is useful in the groin
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some veins have burst in the groin area just as we have mentioned, and examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Do not suspect any cause of the swelling at the knee; and if you suspect anything, it is little; and return it to its place in a short time
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	Maybe if it is prolonged, the swelling will adjust within the thigh, and the swelling will disappear within the thigh; and this is what happens because the thigh is extended just as we have mentioned, which causes the thigh to be stretched, and therefore the swelling is softened and the area is relaxed and examined
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment is with a pointed cautery just as it precedes the narration.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some veins are treated with iron according to this manner: the patient sits on a cushion between your thighs, and then dry the area of the burst veins by cutting around the circumference as much as three fingers wide
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white thigh that is under the groin until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the forceps and hold that above the prominent part of the thigh, and press that over the navel
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then compress the two prominent areas above the extremity of the thigh, and suture one to the other
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the thigh, and do not insert any part of the thigh, nor extend the limb, nor any other cause like I told you in the treatment of intestinal hernia
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then care for the wound as for wound care, and when you have inserted them, soften that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the thigh is contracted and the swelling is not adjusted
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	It is better to leave it closed in this area, for it is more likely to heal well
Capitol .lxviii.	End of Document
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the groin of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many veins in the groin of the testicles in old men are softened by this so that the tissues between them are softened, and it is feared for them
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When it is necessary to treat this it must be done by seating the patient between the thighs and cutting through the entire groin which is softened, and then suture the two lips together
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	Or if you wish, you can also ligate the excessive swelling of the softened groin with three or four stitches and with a firm suture
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then care for the wound until it is healed and the wound comes away.
Capitol .lxix.	End of Document
De castracio.	Of castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	It is known that castration is forbidden in our law, however, I recall it from this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except for two cases, of which the first is when the physician is questioned about it, for he should know how to treat it, and the second case is when we must castrate other animals for our own young for those, as well as mares, dogs, pigs, and the like.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Therefore I say that castration is useful in two ways: either by traction or by incision to the root
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	As for traction, the way to perform the operation is to immerse the beast in cold water until the testicles are softened and limp and hanging down
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take hold of those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to touch anything
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	As for castration by incision and section, you must hold the beast and grasp the testicles with your left hand
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then ligate the surgeon, and make an incision over every vein with a cut that goes through two veins
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut through the rest of the cord that remains outside.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave the wound open to any cause, but rather the soft swelling that is over the veins
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better than traction, for traction often leaves any cause of the testicles causing the beast to desire to mate
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed
Capitol .lxx.	Capitol.lxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Capital.lxx.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is in two ways: one is when it appears that there is space between the testicles, in which case there is a bulge like a female between the testicles.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes the urine is seen in the codena of the testicles
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	More commonly in women: for there is a kind of woman in whom the breast bone is like two testicles of a man, and a little smaller at the bottom than at the top like a man
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two of the males and one of the females
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	So that you put your hand over those which are pressed so that you may expel the mark of that, and do as you please in the treatment of the other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of males from which there is urine in the codena of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of laziness and of prominent flesh due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Excess of laziness is adjusted for natural causes, which makes it legitimate and is recommended; and sometimes it is seen in many women that it is exaggerated as much as in men and even more during coitus
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore put your hand over the superfluous laziness or do it with a sponge.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not proceed rashly, mainly in the area of the genitals, so that you do not cause the flow of semen to cease
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And do as you please in the treatment of the ailments that are healed
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More flesh is born in the horror of the mother than in the abundance of the maiden, and excessive laziness is seen in the departure from the norm (and for this reason it is called the “disease of excess”). Therefore we must proceed in this way as we proceed with laziness, and we must cure that which is healed
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter lxxii
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of carbuncle.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Carbuncle is that which does not pierce the flesh, or that has a small opening
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is for the disease which has preceded it, and that which is caused by no adjustment of the flesh or by fat or by a hard or soft swelling
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is found in the groin or in the breast, on the sides or on the belly or on the buttocks, and prevents any sexual intercourse, coitus or conception, and excessive laziness hinders the menses
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is legitimate for the purpose of the examination, if the swelling is apparent, it is sufficient; even if it is not apparent, the hour you search for that which is in the belly or in the flanks is enough
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	Even if the swelling is for fat, and is at the two lips, the hour you touch and break that is enough
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And put your hand over the two lips, and touch the flanks and the belly indicates that there are pus pockets in those places
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be placed over the two knees, the thighs stretched out, and then stretch out the two lips with force until that fatty swelling is broken and the swelling is opened
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And take oil and pour it over the area and place your hand over it, and hold it for a moment so that the area does not harden
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the swelling is large and soft, the hour you must put something soft over it, such as fat or a piece of myrtle leaf
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if the swelling is for meat, the hour you must do it with a sponge, and then puncture it
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And with all the medicines which stop the flow of semen in general, such as acacia, and bloodroot, and henbane, adjusted with an egg white
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And give a large needle of plum so that the wound does not become permanently solidified
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep it for several days and give it lime juice
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And so it should be treated with another care of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And thus various wounds arise at the greatest birth of other flesh, and it is necessary to cover them according to this manner.</end_of_turn>
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	May be also for swelling of the head, but for swelling of the head which is in the greatest part not to be treated contrary to iron in any manner.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXIII.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the care of hemorrhoids and tail and red swelling which occur in the groin of women.</end_of_turn
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are recognized from the orifices of blood vessels rather than from those which flow without interruption; and when they are ancient hemorrhoids and are made firm they heal themselves.</end_of_turn
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I say that those which receive treatment and those which do not receive treatment.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tail when they are in the groin of the greatest and do not appear to the feeling, it is not necessary to treat them with iron.</end_of_turn
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifice of the greatest about which they feel sensation, those are to be treated.</end_of_turn
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And so you must put the woman in great heat and then extend your thumb with the forceps, or with rough silk, and prick them with the roots.</end_of_turn
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And so you must powder over those with the flow of blood from one of the veins incisions, thus as in the case of the wound and resembling those.</end_of_turn
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And so keep the feet covered for an hour, and then stop that in cold water.</start_of_turn
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make decoction of sumat and of the scales of millet and of gum and of appearance.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And so take oatmeal and comfort it with honey and vinegar and make ointment with water over two of them.</start_of_turn
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is clotted, it is good; but if not, make adherence with two sponges, and to the nipples their scarification.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And so take linen and soak it in the juice of colocynth or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of gentian with white wine and apply it to the place; and care for the place with ointment until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But be careful with the one which is rough regarding this; cover that which you are to prick according to what I have said in the previous instruction.</start_of_turn
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Take care of that until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXIV.</end_of_turn
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of an abscess that has happened in the groin.</start_of_turn
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are various species of abscesses that occur in the groin, such as carbuncle and abscess lapident, ulcerous and abcess of hubblets, ergot of mercury and fistula hemorrhoidal, ragus and tile and other abscesses.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and their species and their signs, and their treatment in the division.</start_of_turn
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And so I say in this treatise of the abscess which comes in the groin when it is of the abscesses which accompany healing, and if you wish to know how it is made with iron.</start_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore you must consider if the pain of the abscess in the thigh at the beginning is acute with percussion and spasm and fever, and sometimes when it covers over that which gives sensation, that is to say, when it does not cause pain, do not hesitate with the perforation, but care for that which helps with the maturation until the acute of the accident has ceased.</start_of_turn
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And so you must put the foot over a cushion which has two cushions; recline on the thigh two fingers and adjust the feet of the patient to the part below the belly, and the thighs wide, and hold the heels down, and tie whatever is convenient to it.</start_of_turn
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And so the midwife follows behind the bladder and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the groin is opened, the shape of which will come in those causes which will make it necessary.</start_of_turn
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the point of the thumb, then cover the surface of the thumb with powder so that no other instrument can penetrate the thumb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Cover the thread that runs along the instrument from its side and remove it from the instrument while holding it and rotate the thread until the hole of the thumb is opened
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the discharge appears, which is touched with the hand and is yellow and thick, then cover the top of it with a spatula of fat.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the feces are evacuated, cover the wound with a soaked sponge in olive oil or in green oil in which there is any itching; and cover the heel in the hole of the thumb
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Place the thumb and over the wound cover the area with a clean bandage soaked in water in which there are boiled mallows
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And so treat for two days until today, when you should give it water until it is healed
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Wash all the vegetables thoroughly and the thumb and the wound with water and vinegar, and then with water in which lilies or long-bodied herbs have been boiled, and finally return to the treatment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the wound is deep in the thumb, prohibit the healing of it with iron, and treat it with that which has been said in the division
Capitol .lxxv.	End of Document.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how these things should be practiced when using unnatural figures.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should know at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth well in order to recognize it from its signs, for when a woman gives birth and wants to smell the air and over this is done with violence, she disgusts the part with this, and it happens that for this reason the part is unnatural, and the sign of it is that it is above the navel, and the second is that it is related to that which is hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, cover the belly so that the embryo will slightly descend when it is about to come out on the navel, and that is enough to break down these superabundances with good monitoring
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If another part is unnatural and useless, for when the embryo comes out on its feet and the body of the fetus comes out in front of the head and the feet of the fetus, and the hand or the heel of the fetus or is located on the head or the hand of the fetus, or at the belly of the fetus, and is greatly converted over the navel, and resembles the unnatural figures
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife is wise and skillful in all these matters, and that she avoids error and deception
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And thus we have shown all the figures of these things, and what is their meaning in these things so that it is significant for what is done and what has been done
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus comes out naturally on the navel and that is violent upon the woman, and that part is difficult, and sometimes the virtue of the woman is already exhausted, then do that which the women have, and vaporize the moisture from her with cinnamon and sweet oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And so mix the midwife between the thighs as little as possible and make an incision at that point, or cut that which is at the tip of her nails until it comes out what is in it of moisture
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press the belly of the woman until it gives birth to the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not come out, cover that the woman should be moistened with mucus of peas and mucus of cinnamon with rosemary.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And so command her, command her to be pressed, that she is compressed and that she should vomit; and cover her mouth and nose for an hour, for the fetus will be forgotten so much the better
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two most important parts of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then reduce them gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her legs up, and then press the cushion down on the earth; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the pressing
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the pulse is not restored and the foot is dead, then it is necessary to pierce that and extract the marrow from the bone or bind the limb to the hand of the patient and extract that as well, for in that way the hand and foot will be freed from their suffering.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From this moment on concerning the swelling of the feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot swells over the ankles, then cover that with your thumb and index finger, and then make the foot smaller, and bring close the other fingers, and grasp a piece of it and gently stretch the little bones outwards.</end_of_turn>
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are like this inside the thighs, then command them to express themselves, and make them vomit whatever is in their condition, for if God wills it they will be freed from their suffering.</end_of_turn>
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not freed from this at all, then return the little foot gradually until you have reached the second natural figure, for in that way the hand and foot will be freed from their suffering.</end_of_turn>
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all this has been forbidden, then take high musellage and dissolved gum, and pierce throughout the bone for good percussion, and press firmly with your hand on the area of the woman, the fluid from her belly.</end_of_turn
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then do that in warm water, until you achieve calmness.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts have become soft, then apply fumigation with myrrh and stop that for them.</end_of_turn>
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when an hour of fumigation has passed, then command them to sit on a cushion, and then make them vomit and open their mouth wide, take away that, and press on the lower part of their belly with slight pressure, for the foot will be freed from its suffering.</end_of_turn
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	From this moment on concerning the swelling of the foot and its pain.</end_of_turn>
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foot swells in this way, then command them to loosen their smaller fingers gradually; and keep the woman's heel resting on the ankle, and their feet hanging down, and let those rest on the thighs, and finish off their fingers.</end_of_turn
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press gently on their belly little by little, and then extract whatever is left of their feet from the ankles until it is ready in the lower part of their leg.</end_of_turn
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not freed from its suffering, then take hold of their feet and move them with violent movements, and press gently on what is above their knee little by little until the foot comes out of its socket.</end_of_turn
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And loosen their fingers again and gradually make the foot smaller, and command the woman to vomit until the foot is freed from its suffering.</end_of_turn
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	From this moment on concerning the lateral swelling of the foot while one of their fingers remains bent.</end_of_turn
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Command them to lower their hand, even if you are unable to do so, and elevate the heel and let it go down.</end_of_turn
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it is not possible to lower it, command them to lie on their thighs, and with your hands bind the patient's limbs with violent pressure, and give them ligatures which you will recommend and medicines.</end_of_turn
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if it is urgent, command them to sit on a cushion, and then study the reduction of the hand, and gently make the foot according to its natural figure, and make them vomit and command them to press themselves until it is freed from its suffering.</end_of_turn
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	From this moment on concerning the swelling of the foot over the ankle, expand their fingers and the foot is at two o'clock of its greatest extent.</end_of_turn
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	That the midwife has the hand of the foot and gradually rotates that little by little, and that will facilitate.</end_of_turn
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equal, and when the hand has been placed over the area as we have recommended of oil and medicines, pause over the area of the patient's palm.</end_of_turn
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command them to gently move their hand little by little, and when you see that it has moved, command them to sit on a cushion and tilt their foot towards the outside, and command them to press; and make them vomit what is in their condition.</end>
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared to come out through the wide opening.</end_turn>
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they are horrified of the great woman in this manner, consider, and when you see that the second finger has passed through the moisture, extract it from the humidity.</end_turn
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the patient's face and neck are swollen, then you should prick the embolus immediately, so that it is not retained and remains.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then quickly pull out the swelling from the wound until you stop, and command the woman to compress her breasts with some compresses, and let the man forget for a moment about his pain, if God or no.</end_of_turn>
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The pain of many joints or feet.</end_turn>
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You must know that twins are born from fat seeds, and some women bear three or four, which is strange and harmful; for it is not from nature, but from the devil.</end_turn
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And concerning those who multiply, even if they are twins, a second one, and are separated by the navel, distinguish those within the ligament in the navel of each one of them. And every woman forgets those immediately as soon as she has conceived naturally, and so they remain unfruitful immediately as soon as we have recommended.</end_turn
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to bear, you must encourage them and persevere until we have mentioned the unnatural figures. Then you take care of them as we have recommended.</end_turn
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the mistress is subtle and makes what is necessary easier and more subtle, and is patient, and is ingenious according to the figure as she is prepared for the threatening disease.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it is formed in the womb from embryos and is aborted.</end_turn
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some physicians verify that a woman should not conceive more than six times, and another ten times in total, for this causes pain in the measure of the learned doctors.</end_of_turn>
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is covered by the knowledge of the mistress that it is strong like that child, and therefore she should be nursed as she should be covered.</end_turn
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 166.</end_turn>
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.</end_turn
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside, and you must certainly use an operation with care, since you must consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not one of the accidents for which she is feared to lose her life.</end_turn
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then you must cover the woman over her belly with two sheets, and her head should be tilted towards the chest and her legs should be raised up.</end_turn
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister has two hands or is bound in the sheet so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.</end_turn
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the woman with oil of olive and mucus of alum and fennel and coriander seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the mistress should take her hand with those oils and mucus, and should intervene with her hand in the belly, and should hold her hand where the nails are in the fetus.</end_turn
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And look well where you are: if you consider that the fetus is ready to come out head first, and when you hold the nails of the fetus in the heel, or in the head, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the beard, or in the armpits of the fetus, or in the proper places of the ribs, or leave the hip bones.</end_turn
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Or if the delivery is on the feet, then in the fifth or in the middle of the back.</end_turn
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And that you have a nail in your left hand, and that you suspend the curvature of the limb in that place which is between the knuckles of your left hand, and intervene with your hand to facilitate and keep the nail in one of those places that we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the pain.</end_turn
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and stay in the position of the limb another nail, or the third if necessary, so that the attraction is equal, and is not only extension according to its rectitude.</end_turn
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Thus be careful with all parts, so that the suffering of the limb is alleviated as soon as possible, just as it is done in the case of the extirpation of the fetus.</end_turn
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And cover them with something that softens the extent; and if any part of them is retained, the hour covers that the midwife should apply an ointment of oil and mix with those that are expected and rotate with those that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If any part of the foot is extruded, the hour cuts through it so that it is exchanged between the one that is more forward; and do so until all the foot is extruded
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the limb is drawn outwards by the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the force of the body, the hour covers that it should be bound up above that; and then extract that until all is extruded, and insert it into the wrist or the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus cover the other hand and both feet
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the foot is large, or if there is a bruise on its covering, or if there is a tight water-bag, the hour covers that it should mix between these spines and open the head and extract the water, or that it should drain it with an instrument called “alundat”, which is like the other instruments in this chapter
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the foot is of great size by nature: and the hour covers that it should insert that sponge or that it should cover that sponge as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extruded and is closed, break the heel; the hour is that the humidity which is in the feet should be evacuated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, or if it does not obey this order, the hour inserts the head as much as possible according to your skill.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if there is swelling of the belly or if there is fluid in it, the hour covers that you should perforate that until the humidity which is in it is expelled
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the foot is above the knees, the hour easily attracts it and directs it to the mouth of the hand is easy
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is closed, you must grasp the foot and the heel, the hour covers that you should extract that sponge which is bound up on your hand, and that you must open the belly and the heel until the water which is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other limbs are relaxed and the head is returned, the hour mixes the left hand; but if the mouth of the hand is open, the hour inserts the hand into the armpit, and grasps the head, and pulls that which is said to the mouth of the hand, and then mix it with them one or two nails and pull them towards them
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the hand is closed by swelling caused by an ulcer, the hour covers that it should not be pressed over it; and the hour covers that it should administer an ointment of oily humors.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient in warm waters that soften and moisten.<end_turn>
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is above the hip, the hour if possible is, to make an incision: and to administer what has been said about the foot alive.<end_turn
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, the hour must be pierced in small pieces, and must be extracted.<end_turn>
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And cover that you do not leave any cause of pain from the second time<end_turn>
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, the hour administers what has been said about the care in the ulcers which occur from the hand.<end_turn
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is discharge of pus, the hour departs in astringent waters and administers the other care.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And indeed I have seen a woman in the belly of whom there was a dead fetus, and upon that another fetus was taken away, and the other fetus was dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to me or to long time after delivery in the belly; and it inflates until it is broken by water, and begins to groan.<end_turn>
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to take care of them, and I medicated them for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated.<end_turn
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I left them for some strong plaster, and I extracted one bone, and I passed a day or two, and I extracted another bone; and I was amazed that in the belly there was no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.<end_turn
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I seize the plague, and extract from it the marrow of bones, the woman exists in the thousand milhs at our disposal, and I have seen in this way for a long time, corrected by it a little of bravery.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not hesitate to say that in this case there is knowledge and aid for the physician to make an artifice with the hand for the administration of treatment
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Concerning the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract it
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of seeing in which the greater part is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strength in which the guts are grasped, to which two vertiges are attached at the two extremities of two feet
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	May, however, this vertige cover that it is more subtle of a strictor, and is made or of fat or of boys' testicles
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each fist is as two fingers and the breadth of each thumb as one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of two fists are two adjustments of that middle fist which have already been fixed, of which the length is half a palm and a little, and the width of each is like two fingers, or a little more
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are introduced into the mouth of the greater part so that it is opened with those two prescribed vertiges.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that which is more subtle and more light
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Made from fat or testicles of boys according to the form of forceps
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But in the extremity of them are two additions like those sometimes, and the length of those additions is like a palm, and the width of each is two fingers
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the greater part, then you make the woman lie down on the side of the thighs, open what is between the thighs of her.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And bring your hand close to the instrument like a pair of forceps according to the quantity you wish of the opening of the mouth of the greater part until the metronome makes so that you can do it
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertige which they say the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing with which the bone is pressed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of pressure with which the great head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like forceps to which teeth are added at the extremity, like sometimes, and some veins are made like forceps according to this form, like sometimes, to which teeth are added like teeth of a saw to which incision is made and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of little pressure
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a single horn with a spine
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a single horn with two spines
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which teeth of iron are added with which the head of the bone is contained
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities to which the head is severed
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercises, and when they are multiplied with the species of that, and when they are prepared, you must order the artificer, because it is more curious about his operation and more must you order the men for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with those instruments, whether you are going to or must do it, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the marrow.<end_turn>
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the marrow is retained you must support it, and order the patient to retain the heel, and bring that stone to vomit up with condiment, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and over the nails of her, and if by chance it escapes, well and good
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Or, take hold of an instrument and pierce through the covering a hole and put on that herb which opens the mouth of the greater part, like camomile and rue and mint and saffron and chamomile and Arabic gum and mastic and rue de la cruz.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and keep that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And bring close a catheter of gutta in the mouth of the greater part, and keep that inside until the vapor comes out to the cavity of the greater part
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And thus do we make her vomit as we have said, and the second time she will be forced out with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If it remains close to this treatment and is not expelled, then command the matron to submerge your left hand in olive oil or in milky almond, and mix some of that in the palm of your hand and over that in the groin, and when you have found the pain, then take hold of that and stretch it out slowly. If it is attached to the greater trochanter, then mix your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the other, extract that little by little according to the rule so that the greater does not suffer excessive traction.</end_of_turn>
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Henceforward let the right and left thighs be interchanged with ease.</end_of_turn>
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And thus let it be adjusted in the quantity of traction, so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.</end_of_turn>
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the greater is closed, as we have already recommended, we will have said the treatment with vomiting and medication of oil with herbs.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If it is not expelled by all the means we have recommended, then know that you must not be discouraged by the repetition of the extraction, for whatever comes out of it at the mouth of the greater lies in the cavity of the thigh, and mix that with unguent and tetrazepam; for that will cause it to soften and be expelled.</end_of_turn
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is exhausted, it is of little use to raise foul odors to the head and stomach, for that brings on the illness; and therefore we must administer sub-fumiguous remedies and convenient means with oil.</end_of_turn
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Indeed, among the Ancients, there is often a sub-fumigation of rue and dried figs.</end_of_turn
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Such is the instrument with which the thigh is sub-fumigated because of the retention of menses and the second:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Either with a needle or an iron.</end_of_turn>
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the limb be supported on the palm of the hand and the limb be placed on the heel, and let the sub-fumigation be performed over the sleeves of the fire.</end_of_turn
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep doing that until the sub-fumigation has been consumed and is repeated again.</end_of_turn
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	As for the treatment of the buttocks of the unperforated child...</end_of_turn
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The child cries and their buttocks are not perforated, which already irritate the limb and obstruct it.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore command the matron to perforate as I have said; and if not, perforate with a sharp needle, and take care not to touch the nerve.</end_of_turn
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place over that wound oil and vinegar; and take care that the wound enters until it is settled.</end_of_turn
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is obstructed, then pause for a while in the wound a needle to expel for a few days, and keep it until the child is well.</end_of_turn
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And indeed the obstruction of the buttocks may be for consolidation of pus or of haematoma; therefore let that consolidation be interrupted, and let it be cured with the remedies and methods that we have mentioned.</end_of_turn
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that arise from the buttocks.</end_of_turn
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that arise in the lower part of the buttocks are nodular and large, which arise from the greater trochanter or in the space of the buttock.</end_of_turn
E es una fistula o motas.	Whether it is a fistula or a collection of matter.</end_of_turn
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that nodule is old and softened by excessive humidity white or yellow pus, and some herbs penetrate these fistulas.</end_of_turn
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrate are known for that which comes out of them by evacuation and by wind; and some physicians use the bad evacuation of the bowels, and more does it come out of them violently.</end_of_turn
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those penetrate enter the bladder, and enter the meat of the heel; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and enter the neck of the femur.</end_of_turn
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And it is known that a penetrating fistula that enters the buttocks and not penetrating is that you must indicate to the patient that it is in the buttocks, and enter with an iron or needle into the fistula when it is soft and not painful.</end_of_turn
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	May it be known that when swelling occurs in that area due to a wound of plum or hair of a horse, and you feel the swelling or hair in the belly, that is a sign of the disease.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not perceive any wound or cause of discharge, fever, or wind, as we have said, then it is to be known that the swelling is not penetrating, and therefore you must take care of it.</end_of_turn>
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula is penetrating, it enters the bladder or the meat of the heel. In this case, the meaning is that there is urine from that fistula, and prohibition of its discharge, so that the area may be solidified with medicine.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May it be known that when it penetrates the joint or bone and causes pain in the circuit, the sign of it is that the swelling has penetrated here if not because of a wound in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the limb; and that from this it is reduced in all its parts; and that it is of no use in this medicine, neither is it solidified at this time.</end_of_turn
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all such penetrating fistulas there is no cure for all, but the cure for these is the work and diligence of the physicians who must be held responsible for it.</end_of_turn>
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and does not grow old, recovery is expected as I will tell you when I have learned and recommended it, and what I have already practiced.</end_of_turn
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that the patient lies between your thighs and raises the legs up to their shoulders, the thighs are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and you must enter with a plum, or hair if there is swelling in the fistula, until you feel the swelling has disappeared.</end_of_turn
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient groans around the belly, then you must enter with the thumb of your hand at the belly.</end_of_turn>
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the thumb has already penetrated without your perceiving it, or if you perceive between the thumb and the heel or the hip, it is certainly known that the swelling is penetrating; and in this case you must not work in this, for there is no cure in this, as we have said.</end_of_turn
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However I say that in many cases it is well with some people.</end_of_turn>
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine for which healing is expected from it is that you burn the pointed cautery subtly according to the extent of the fistula, as it has been said before, and introduce that fire into the fistula until it has disappeared from the belly; and then repeat that two or three times until you believe that all the swollen tissues which resemble plumes of owls have been softened.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then care for those which are wrapped in cloth until all the swollen parts have healed, and care for those medicines which generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; but if not, it is known that it will not be healed by any other treatment.</end_of_turn
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the thumb enters but does not penetrate into the thumb which is at the heel, and between that and the thumb which is very sensitive to flesh or bone, and sometimes the fistula reaches the surface of the heel, it is known that the heel of the fistula must be cauterized from the beginning of the fistula, and that you must see the thumb dry, and that both the thumb and the fistula are freed from their attachments.</end_of_turn
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And finally make smooth those swollen tissues which resemble feathers of owls and do not remain from any cause.</end_of_turn
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	However if there is flux of pus sometimes that comes between you and your operation when you have finished cauterizing those tissues, then it is better to burn with fire or acute medicine, because the burning with fire fits well in these good days: it is the closing of those swollen tissues and the excision of the excessive moisture.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And care for those which are wrapped in cloth or in causes of distress until the limb gets better, and care that the hours care for the wound when the flesh is hard and durable that it generates and consolidates.</end_of_turn
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines in which there is styptic action and excision; when the hour is restored it is already healed and you do not fear repetition.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	However if the fistula has already penetrated into the groin and is elongated from its surface of the body, then you must enter with the thumb into the groin and inquire about that.</end_of_turn
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	Therefore if you seize the thumb and between you and it is very sensitive to bone or flesh, and it seems likely to penetrate, it is not an operation in this case but according to a way of trust and hope.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Which is to administer in this case one of three ways: either that you burn it as we have said; or that you drain it so that you can achieve the curvature of the foot so that you can easily enter with your fingers and the treatment will be more effective; and do not proceed with the incision unless you wish to cause damage to the surrounding skin, and take care of the patient immediately regarding the presence of the infection; or that you lengthen the swelling and remove that pus which you drained from the bottom of the heel, as we have said, or with another instrument of sharp extremity, and make smooth those swollen tissues which remain after the excision; and finally strive to restore the whole wound by means of the incision, and if the pus has not solidified in the meantime, and the fistula remains open in the heel, and if there is still pus in the wound, then there is still infection.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	The fistula is finished when you enter the needle into the fistula, at the base of the buttocks surrounding the area around the hip and the edge of the buttocks. Then take hold of the needle and perforate the extremity, as if you were preparing the area according to this method.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and you enter into that thick covering of fat or around those; and then enter the needle with the tip in the fistula until you achieve the concavity of the area.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Maybe if it is perforated in the margin of the buttocks, then you extract the thread from that hole as soon as you insert the needle there; and you extract the extremity of the thread and join the two extremities together, and then bind each one, and keep it so for a day or two, and when it has healed, open that again until those parts that are between the two extremities of the thread and that are causing the pain have healed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And take care of the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Maybe if the opening of the fistula is not perforated, then it is necessary to perforate it in some way, even if you have prepared it, for it is not your business to leave it unclosed, because that would cause damage; and then do so until it has healed
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatum spine concerning which the fistula is made: the curvature of which is not acute and the other part is not blunt, so that you do not cause any damage which is not necessary, even as it is sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	From suture of emorrhoids in which runs clean at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorrhoids are of two kinds, either those that remain between the buttocks like those of cartilage, or those that are like the seeds of grass
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and that heal from those to these, and is one, and not many, and are outside the buttocks, and in the extremities of the buttocks.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the buttocks are according to the months of little humidity, of which run citrine water or a little of salt with continuous application, and according to the color of the buttocks.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the care of those that are inside the buttocks is that you command the patient to sit down and express until the swelling has gone down and the hemorrhoids appear to you
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take hold of me and suspend me with one hand or that you have them with your nail, and then apply those with your nails.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Maybe if their nails are not kept in those for the humidity of their nails and their softening, then take hold of those with a rough or coarse or slippery hand, and extract those with the tip of the needle, and then insert those into the buttock, and sprinkle over them some fine powder nearby the incision, so that it adheres to those instead of causing them to fall out; or cauterize those as it is foreseen in the chapter on cautery
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And take care of those with the other care until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not obey to defecation, then you bite the patient on the cheek with a slight bite, and wash with that water which is in the buttock and which obediently obeys defecation when the patient defecates.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, the cause of them is slight, and it is that you take hold of those with your nail, or that you take hold of those with a hook, and insert those, and then take care of those with water as has been said until they are healed
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever has the incision, cover that you administer suture to him according to this method: take a thread bundle and enter that with a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle at the root of the other part, and encircle the two extremities of the thread at the back of the needle, and so horizontally; and close the hemorrhoid with a strong structure, and then do not tie the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do all this, and leave them one and do not close them, so that the excess of the healing runs from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And leave it resting on the buttock immersed in olive oil or in cerate; and leave that on the buttock and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave it until the swelling has gone down; and when it is gone, take care of those with grease or another care until they are healed
De curacio de fistulas.	Chapter on fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	The cause of many fistulas is excessive opening of an opening or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And thus, as in ancient times, it is not valid in this medicine, for you must know that when these humors are hot and moist, and when they are caused by the thick pus which issues from them, they impede their consolidation; therefore you must cure them before they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must keep these humors in such a ratio as before until they are completely healed; and you must cure them before they are healed.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	This is the key to treatment.</end_turn>
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You must know that to blanch, is the key; and it is not without notice that the color of the body resembles that of the armpit, and that it is useful throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the limbs, and because of these pains you must apply an emollient.</end_turn
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And thus it is necessary to circumscribe that which is in the circuit of the key, and to hold it with forceps or one hand, and to extirpate it from its root; and you must cure that.</end_turn
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is said above in the head.</end_turn>
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More commonly seen is a small, rough, round swelling on the surface of the body, and streaks of pus are seen in the majority of children.</end_turn
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for these is to stretch and puncture them, or to open them with a knife or needle until the pus has drained.</end_turn
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.</end_turn
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus they are eradicated both backwards and forwards with the instrument which I mentioned.</end_turn
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More commonly seen is a small, foul-smelling swelling or large swelling on the surface of the body, which when it is cold finds itself in it as if it were a mortification of a flea, and is useful throughout the body.</end_turn
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for these is that you take a needle of awl or of trocar, and that it be strong, and place it on the flea until it fills the circle of the needle in the limbs; and then you will rotate your hand over the needle until you have punctured the flea from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do the same with a needle of iron or steel in this way:</end_turn
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part behind the needle should be grasped with dexterity, deaf (so as not to perforate), enveloped so that the bite of the limb is softened and the rotation of that.</end_turn
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the flea as we have said in the section on cautery of the cautery needle.</end_turn
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In this way as the instruments that are administered to give comfort.</end_turn
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some ointments are useful for comfort of silver or lead or wax softened or malleated; and some ointments are useful for those instruments which are administered to the little ones because those which are administered in the treatment of young children are small; and for those in which the buttocks are rough or painful, the ointments of these are small.</end_turn
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The way to give comfort to the great and the few.</end_turn
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle of the limb on which the bag is tied is wide according to this manner; and that there be distinction between the place where the bag is tied thus as sometimes.</end_turn
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the limb below the elbow, which is included in the buttocks, is deaf (so as not to burst) except for a lion, behind which there are two veins, on one side and one vein on the other side, and the breadth of the vein is according to the size of the rays and the greater the size, the smaller the vein.</end_turn
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin are placed, and the root of it is a palm.</end_turn
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it is pierced by four veins thus as it is rotated; and if the space between the veins is the thickness of a finger.</end_turn
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And thus enter into those veins firmly with twelve threads, or more; and adjust with that the bag; and when it is placed in it the bag is stretched in the head of the comfort between two marks with strong constriction, and you must comfort with each of these: More importantly you must fill the bag with medicine, which must be scalded according to the degree of the patient's tolerance; and take care that it is neither too cold nor too hot.</end_turn
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And thus the patient is placed supine on the two hips, and the legs are elevated above the chest; and a cushion is placed under the buttocks or a bandage; and oil or albumin of herbs or mucilage of fenugreek or similar is applied to the surface of the wound; and it is introduced into the fistula with ease, and the minister grasps the bulge and expresses it until it is evacuated from the wound throughout; and then the fistula is extracted and the patient lifts their legs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the treatment forces one to remain lying down, have as much rest as possible; and if you sleep for the whole night, it is better in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Better if you delay the evacuation of the belly and the lying down of the patient until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if pus or blood clots are seen in the fistula, then let the fistula be wide and round, as is the custom with the fistula of children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Take care of the wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the care of wounds that it is proper for the free, and I say the same concerning the care of those with me and with medicines according to the compliment
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are diverse according to the cause of the wounds and the place where the wound occurs
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which the wounds are caused are various, such as the bite of a stone, or incision of space or rib, or percussion with the hand, or with a fist, or with a needle, or like those of other causes.</end_turn>
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Better are the wounds that are on the parts of the body like the head, or the heel, or the foot, or the belly, or the groin, or like those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	I recommend the care of some wounds so that you stop reasoning and regulate concerning the others wounds
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple head wounds, because the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when an accident happens in the head with a simple wound and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the bite of a stone or something similar, and if it has already bled profusely alone and is a great wound and you fear that there may be pus coming out, then cover the head immediately with a dressing and evacuate the head as soon as possible; extract it according to the amount of the virtue of the dressing if there is no other prohibiting cause of evacuation, especially if the wound that has been evacuated is little.</end_turn>
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the evacuation be counter to the side of the wounded part; and keep the patient from eating and drinking and eating coarse food.</end_turn>
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Better if from the beginning it prohibits any cause, then let the food be diminished and do not approach meat or drink.</end_turn
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And stop the wound, if pus comes out from the wound, cover it with ointment of olive oil or in wine in which it is stopped.</end_turn
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Better if you are sure of the pus coming out, then stop over the wound, if it is recent at the hip joint and the air has not moved that dust which I recommend to remove with a little brush.</end_turn
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already moved that, stop over the wound until it is healed.</end_turn
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Better if the wound is great or is for incision of space and something similar, and the edges are not adjusted for pupils, then adjust them with sutures as I recommend for their sutures.</end_turn
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Better if the wound has already been uncovered from the bone and the pulp, and it is not a retention but a little swelling, then prick it and apply medicine to the wound and restore the limb nearby in place of bleeding, and command the patient not to eat foods that are coarse: heads and brains and things like that, until it is healed.</end_turn
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the wound putrefying and does not adhere to the bone, then prick everything that can be pricked and remove what can be removed, and apply treatment to it.</end_turn
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Better if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows profusely, and which is not stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not injured, then prick it with a needle, or ligate it; and if necessary you must cause that which we have said is not to be done, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.</end_turn
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plaguas are simple and small, the cause of them is slight; thus you should powder over them that which consolidates when it is dry, for it alters those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The manner of applying the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of st. John's wort, and three parts of unrefined rosin; mix them together and grind them, and let the plague be filled with it, and let it be tightly closed so that it may adhere to that, and let it be solidified with st. John's wort.</end_of_turn>
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen the area with powder and read it, and do not remove it until it has dried, for it is not banished by medicine until it has healed.</end_of_turn>
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And every time it is done alone, when it is not at your disposal olive oil and st. John's wort.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And thus this same operation is done in great plagues when it is necessary to pause over them and restrain them, and only in recent plagues where their sanctum has not been altered.</end_of_turn>
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if they have been altered, and especially when it is in summer, it is not understood that the position of this powder is good; thus you should suspend over them soft substances such as unguents, or suspend over them barley flour mixed with water and honey until it has become reduced; and take care of them with the other treatment until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Or if it happens in the plague that a fracture occurs in a limb, and it is small, then you extract from it with your hand.</end_of_turn
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say concerning the treatment of fractures of the head that it is venomous.</end_of_turn>
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the groin.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Or if the plague happens in the groin, there is no difference in treatment between it and the plague of the head when it is simple.</end_of_turn
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Or if the nerves of the groin are cut or an artery, if it is a nerve, it is not in their engineering but it should be avoided treatment of them with that which makes violent stitching, even as with zinc and sage, which is ancient and seems to be useful for them because it does not touch the nerves and opposes that.</end_of_turn
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not suspend over the plague any cause of great cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is at the brain, which is the most important of all members.</end_of_turn
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it must be treated with medicines that are slight, as is the cause of a washed wound with soft water, any vegetable juice mixed with olive oil or not-oiled, and throw it out when it has been washed with soft water and the other small stones, as is said above, and rub it dry.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	Or if the plague is great, then administer sutures, or bandage its edges, and take care of it with powders until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Or if the plague has depth or has happened at the lower part of the body, then perforate it in the place where it is most depressed.</end_of_turn
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	Or if in the plague an artery has already been cut and blood flow has been achieved, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessary to cause it to bleed.</end_of_turn
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	Or if the spinal column of the groin or all of them have already been cut, and the veins of the groin have been saved, then you adjust the edges of the thigh over the hip bone with sutures without touching that; keep that equal and reduce that to its natural figure, and strengthen that by stretching it properly, and read it for a few days; and take care of that until the bleeding stops.</end_of_turn
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	Or if the plague has already caused pain in the bone, then pierce that; and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract them all; and what is not broken, read it until the plague has disappeared, and be separate and relieve the discharge of it.</end_of_turn
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powder over that the powder that has been recommended to you.</end_of_turn
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	Or if there is a fistula in the plague, then care for that with water of which the memory will come later in the chest.</end_of_turn
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the groin plagues or of a similar nature when it happens between the buttocks and is caused by space or in the navel or in the groin or in a similar way.</end_of_turn
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of the groin or navel, and sometimes of its depth, consider more if there is any wind than the patient has; for the plague is mortal.</end_of_turn
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If in them there is no depth and the disease is recent, then you should wait in them for the first hour before powdering them, and do not stretch that until it is not retained in the depth of them and returns to the heart and increases the disease, but wait in them gently, and remove that dose of medicine which you gave yesterday.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the tongue is not there, then you should wait in the orifice of the disease for a while because of the humors; and make the disease sleep over the disease so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if already of the disease three days have passed or more and it has not happened that the patient has spasmodic pain or bad tremor of the heart or stricture of the belly, and sometimes other good symptoms of the disease, then you know that the disease is saved; and then care for that as for calouses and for the other care that is necessary until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of the disease is excused, and it has already opened, then you know that the fistula is already formed; care for that for its head
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the disease is for incision of space or of bone, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the thigh, then you care for that as for what precedes suture, if it is great, or as for powdering, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if already there has been made price in the bone, and so only of it has been pierced, then you twist the disease and cover to extract those pieces, if they are separated
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then you read the whole until the disease is relaxed, because the extraction of them is alleviated
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for the other diseases that happen in the other members, the help in their care is the help of what has been said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the diseases of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the belly is or great, or little, or medium
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great quantity of medicine which you gave him, there is pain to the belly or nerves of the belly, because it is a bad introduction of them and the suture of them must be more violent and more delicate
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is difficult for another way, and even if the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introduction of them to the head so that it does not open and is thickened because the contents are difficult to extract
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is medium, because in that one the reduction of the belly is not difficult, even as it is difficult in the two preceding ones
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common that they are customary in the sutures of the other diseases of the body
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are proper of the other diseases, but indeed they are more proper in the suture of the belly
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you to speak of every exposure and declaration
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the disease is small and there is any cause of the belly for that, and it is difficult to reduce that, the hour is in one of two ways: or for the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the belly is affected by inflammation due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Therefore when it is like that, the hour is that you cover that immediately that you immerse a sponge soaked in warm water alone, or that you compress with water squinants, and chamomile, and pepper, and cloves in that belly until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Many medicines make that which has stopped bleeding, and it is better than only water in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation is resolved, the hour is that you moisten the belly with water in which it is immersed at a high temperature and mallow, because by that the contents are alleviated with little cause
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the contents are excused by this care, the hour is to cut the disruption with a small instrument with which only the incisions are wounded.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first care is better, when it is proper that it is not dry, and that it is not an occupation to force unnecessarily and to starve.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part is acute, and the other part not acute, and the extremity should be blunt, and not at all like the bluntness of a sponge, bending a little forward
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore, when the plague becomes more intense and the intestine comes out, it is necessary that its reduction be performed in the natural way, in the appropriate place, if possible over the area which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is widespread, and is in the lower part of the belly, it is necessary to place the patient over the two buttocks and suspend the lower limbs above the navel; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, it is necessary to suspend the head and the upper limbs above the chest.</end_of_turn>
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two halves of the belly, then you must suspend your understanding and consideration for a moment in order that the affected part may be higher than the other.</end_of_turn>
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary to administer cold in the great plagues and in the intermediate plagues.</end_of_turn>
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small plagues, suspend cold that is ready to hand, and immediately provide that it be administered between your greatest pains, which has the disruption throughout with its hand and adjusts the lips, and immediately uncover from that to that in which any suture may cause you to stop.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture technique: that you grasp the needle, or the handle of the needle according to the extent of the swelling; and immediately lay aside the extremity of the disruption from the little finger; and tighten the needle once, or twice as much as you do not want to tear the two ends of the cord, at the two extremities which are left by the cord from the parts which are descending, until you have pierced through that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the phalanx, so that there are four orders in total.</end_of_turn>
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And immediately tighten once more at the circle of the needle, and several threads of two parts together, and immediately add the two lips and the swelling by addition; and immediately withdraw the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that place, and immediately bind that as firmly as the first needle; and do not cease doing this until you have completed the entire contraction of the swelling.</end_of_turn
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And if the needles are small between fat and leanness, because the fine needles do not pierce the flesh willingly; and the large ones are difficult to handle in the cord, therefore it is necessary that they be done in leanness and fatness.</end_of_turn
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed at two extremities of the cord too much, so that the flesh is not pierced too willingly and that the swelling opens before its consolidation.</end_of_turn
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the suture too much so that the swelling is not prohibited from consolidation.</end_of_turn>
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And immediately pierce the extremities of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient who is sleeping; and will stop over the suture loose threads from all around, which have the extremities of the needles; and withdraw those as soon as you know that the swelling is already consolidated.</end_of_turn
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These methods of suture with needles in cold weather are more convenient in the small plagues, because they require only one or two needles or around those.</end_of_turn
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is common: that you administer with the suture the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the phalanx, at once, with a needle in which be firmly enclosed cloth in leanness and fatness.</end_of_turn
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And immediately when the needle has pierced these four extremities, reduce the needle of that middle part from which you began, so that the thread is drawn back box of the soft parts that rise up to the swelling, so that the suture is as much like a normal suture as possible.</end_of_turn
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the middle finger.</end_of_turn
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suture is harmful to women.</end_turn
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture I saw that the swelling which had been caused to a man in his belly which had been affected by a boil, which was the greatest swelling of a palm, and which was expelled from the intestines around two palms of the heel and was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and when I had reduced that, after the swelling had been outside the plague for forty-eight hours.</end_of_turn
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in about fifteen days or around, and it healed that and it is healthy; and it is said that it is the custom in these matters.</end_of_turn
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had given up that it would not be healed; and by a miracle, behold, it healed without any remedy, for in that place there was neither any other remedy nor any medicine, but I stayed over the plague constantly for two days and gave it constant attention with honey water until it healed.</end_of_turn
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May I say two kinds of sutures which are proper according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you commence with the suture of the tendon, and enter the needle from the part of the tendon towards the part of the tendon.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle pierces the tendon and in that middle lacerate straight and along the whole body, and leave the end of the gut which you have inserted the needle into; and make penetrate in the other end the needle from the part of the tendon towards the part of the tendon in the other end of the body
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus when you have finished making that penetrate, then make another incision in that middle part of the body from the part of the tendon towards the part of the tendon; and leave the gut which is in that place, and make penetrate the needle in the other end from the part of the tendon towards the part of the tendon
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And thus make penetrate also that the other incision which you made in the gut which is in the part of the body which is under all those which penetrate
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And thus begin from this middle side and as that which is at the end of the gut in the other side, and extract the needle from the tendon which penetrates, and then reduce that in that tendon and close the gut which is in the other side of this body; and extract that from the tendon which is from the part of the body
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make two incisions and another, and make another incision near another incision until you close all that which is from before according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of stitching is that you close with a suture of skin with which you close the skin, except that you leave an opening at the part of the end of the tendon, and that you leave that other opening until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Moreover the second kind of proper suture which I say is called Gualia, and this is thus recommended for them, is that you close according to the custom which certain medicants close that, except that you add all the parts to their proper parts to them convenient in nature; and apply the other part of them to the other part of them, and that is done according to what I have recommended to you
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Because you have left the needle in the part of the body at your will from the part of the tendon, and you make that penetrate to the part of the tendon in that hole, and leave two gut ends; and then you reverse the needle and make that penetrate from the part of the tendon towards the part of the tendon in two gut ends.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And thus reverse those pieces, and make penetrate any which are from the part of the tendon towards the part of the tendon in two gut ends which are in the other side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of stitching is better than the common suture of the lighter kind, and is a suture of which there is precedent.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the term of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And I will tell you something, the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so that you enter with these into each gut a thread, and begin with the introduction of the needle from that which is towards you, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those which close the body parts together
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, the hour of stitching it is more difficult than in the other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	Moreover the saying of the physicians is that the judgement of the plague is like that of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which cause is that when you become aware of the recent plague at the place of health that the air alters that, and reduces the gut and close that and put that away diligently, the hour you stop over that dusty powder
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, the hour you stop over that dust at that moment until it makes a hard stone and holds the guts, and consolidates gut and body; and take care of that as well as is the care of the other plagues until it is healthy
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	Moreover if you are not present the medicines, the hour you stop over that much, because it begins to vomit bile, cough violently, and change two gut juices which you give, as you have been taught, until it is healthy, because you do not digest another medicine in large quantities when the plagues are simple
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Moreover if you fear that the plague communicates by wound to the principal members, the hour you cover that with lion fat in quality olive oil, or in sweet oil, and stop that in the circle of the places which are between the armpits and leave the armpits free.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If pain or decay is felt in the thighs, where fat has gathered, and swellings appear, it is said that the cause is an accumulation of black bile which has become infected, and is more so when the infection has penetrated the fat and has spread inwards.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	It is known that the large intestine is pus-filled and easily heals, while that of the small intestine is of a finer consistency
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to heal because the belly which is called "gegunu" does not accept the application of a salve that would otherwise suffice in other cases; for there are many veins in it and because of their great number and their proximity to nerves
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If it is a wound that has come from the plague, and if you are able to make it recent, reduce it as much as you can according to your instructions for healing swellings
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has already passed beyond the space and has become green or black, however, when you strengthen your hand firmly over the area that is painful, in order to prevent the flow of blood, for in the wound there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And so it is necessary to cut through what is another ligament, and suspend the two extremities of the hand from the part where the plague has spread, so that there is relief of the traction of the tissues and the emission of the plague from the wound
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the plagues when they happen in the belly
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is disruption in the belly and it is slight, it is possible that it will be contained within the abdomen, in order to help that which was affected by the plague in the lower belly through percussion of the hand, which was the plague of the lower part of the stomach, and the plague was old and the fistula was formed, and the evacuation of its contents and exhalation of air
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And so we must continue the care of the wound even if we are not confident in the healing of the wound, but we must diligently apply that which will restore the integrity of the limb when the wound has healed and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And we must also consider the general condition of the patient who has suffered this accident in the lower belly; and do not neglect any other cause of the illness that remains in his body, such as hunger and thirst, and to drink and eat, and to put him in a warm bath and exercise as he is able
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	I have also heard from experienced people that when the plague is slight in the belly, it should be treated in this way: take large doses of caps; and when you bring the two lips of the plague close together and open your mouth over them, the head of the plague will stick to the lips and will not be dissolved
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And so we must give another dose immediately, and do not cease giving them until we have given as many doses as there are in the whole plague
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And so we must reduce the swelling and the pain of the plague; and keep those caps attached to the belly until the belly is healed; and do not neglect the patient's general condition during this time
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the belly is attached with a fine thread which is the cause of the beastly belly; for it is more like a needle; and if you grasp the extremity of this thread and do not tear it, and you tie the extremity of it to the faithful limb, encircling it, and pass the thread through needles and sew up that part of the belly, and reduce that which is in the disruption
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This way of stitching with doses of caps is nothing but a way of hoping and trusting in God<end_turn>
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is great and wide, more so if it is in one of the small intestines, then it is not sufficient to give only a small dose; and it is not the cure for all of it
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Treatment of worms and fistula<end_turn>
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	It is known that all plagues and swellings when they grow old and become rotten become ulcers, and are not consolidated and always get their arm broken and are not separated, the hour in any member, is universally called fistula and is named after those worms<end_turn>
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to the truth is a foul, hard, white ulcer with which there is no pain and which is concave just as much as a wound from sorrow; and for this reason it is called a wound of sorrow or penalty<end_turn
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is in the moist belly which gets its arm broken; and when the moisture is expelled, it is separated in a few hours<end_turn>
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some of these worms expel this moisture which is moist, little, great, and subtle<end_turn
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And thus I have already said concerning the division, when I said concerning the plagues, that every ulcer which is not healthy and which is not on the body alone, is not due to anything else save for one of the following causes: either for want of health in the body; or for malice of the patient; or because between the patient and the lips there is hard and tough flesh which hinders the birth of flesh; or because it is a moist ulcer; or because the matter which is at the bottom of the ulcer is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not suitable for the healing of the ulcer; or when corruption arises in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the property of the region itself, as it is with Saragossa, in which it is difficult to digest the ailments, and slow to heal naturally.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Indeed, all those causes have already been shown, as well as the symptoms and the treatment of them, in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so I shall tell you about the cure for fistula, which is effective by means of an operation with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for some are fistulas which arise from great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or the intestines, or the bladder, or the kidneys, or any of the vertebrae, or the joints which are composed of bones in such a way as the hand and foot; and of these those which are closest to the main limb and which resemble them.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, that fistula which is treated in this manner is among the diseases of difficult healing, and does not respond to treatment, and requires work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is a fistula of any depth which does not reach these areas which I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in the treatment of it, and you wish to achieve cognition of it, when you attempt to remove or cauterize it, and if the fistula goes according to rule, then inquire about it from me.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Perhaps if the fistula is tortuous, then inquire about the attempt to place the hand under the root of the limb, because the lifting of the body of the limb is alleviated and curved against the tortuousness.</start_of_turn>
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is not accompanied by horrifying symptoms, it is not within your power to know about it by attempting to inquire about it.</start_of_turn
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore glorify the Lord for his wonders, for the moisture which comes from his hands overcomes the others and runs from them.</start_of_turn
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire cautiously, according to what manner you are able, whether here is bone or nerve, and whether the curvature of the fistula is long or short, or whether it is a fistula to which some or all of these orifices are joined and this is beyond the sum of all your strength, your wisdom, your knowledge of diseases, and your invention of the pain which comes from your compression with your hand over the area, and resemblance to the symptoms and the accidental causes of apostema.</start_of_turn
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all these causes and have confirmed them, then you shall see the treatment with confidence: that is, when you consider that if it is a fistula which is close to the surface or in the limb, long from the joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or a vein, or of any of the places which I have mentioned to you, I say.</start_of_turn
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Therefore dry the fistula as I have said above in the narration, and remain over that which is in the filtering and putrefaction, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or in the blood vessels, or in resemblance, and cure that which comes when it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	However if the fistula is of great depth and is according to rule, then I advise you to inscribe that in the preparation as much as you can, and to moderate that of all your corrupted flesh; and to administer warm compresses covered with medicines which are acute, and to introduce them into the curvature of the fistula which you have comprehended with the hand.</start_of_turn
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with any herbs which are within you that the acute medicine may corrode all that remains in the curvature of the fistula of the corruption.</start_of_turn
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And finally restore that which engenders healthy flesh until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	However if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as I have recommended.</start_of_turn
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	However if the cause of the fistula is bone and is due to you, then inquire about it and dry it according to what I have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main limb as I have said.</start_of_turn
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	However if it is discovered to you that it is in them any corruption and blackness, then remove that which is corrupted throughout; and care for that which remains until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and the patient has a swollen wrist, it is clear that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and now you discover it on them subsequently and excellently perform the reason for them and the transformation of them with the posterior reinforcement of your power, and then restore the latter.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	Therefore, if he is healthy, it is well; but if not, it is clear that that corruption is in the profound depths of the body, which you have not been able to overcome, and consequently you must lay aside that which does not work
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corruption is slight, or you are able to drive it out, then at that time you drive it out with fine forceps which are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if bones are moved, then excellently perform the extraction of all those, and of those do not leave any cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Perhaps there is some cause from the humors, and at the beginning there is no fear or error, but then it is necessary to cut those ligaments or tissues if they are here, and deliver the bones
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Perhaps if you are not prepared to extract the bones at your time, then pause over the wound so that the wound does not worsen, and leave that until the bones of flesh and ligaments are in the vicinity, and keep the wound from solidifying, and constrict the incision that you have made in your operation
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you fear it, pause over the wound covered in soft tissue with oil, or over the wound covered in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the above-mentioned unguents, because when they touch those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their socket, the wound will be relieved
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Perhaps if it is a great bone, such as the bone of the limb or the bone of the thigh or something like those, and what is corrupted of it is only the surface, then at that time you should burn that only behind until that black spot and corruption have been consumed, and then restore the wound
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Perhaps if what is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and everything that has been incised in order to reach the corruption, and to cure that which has solidified.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you should ask a man in his bed to stay with you so that he can watch and assist you in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	For a boy of about xxx years of age, who has suffered pain in his side, and from whose parts the greatest part of the matter has gone into the body until the matter has reached the side, and is a matter of great swelling, and not of external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And consequently the time is prolonged in that for the error of the doctors until the swelling has subsided, and we must remove from it the morbid matters, and the care of it is to stop when the limb is stitched, and to do what is useful in those morbid matters that all the poisons and humors of the body are eliminated.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And thus there are many physicians who have treated him for two years, and I do not know anything about it, except that I have been called
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the limb of that man and the matter that flowed from those wounds from great wounds; and already the body of that man was quite stable and the color was lemon yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced the hook into one of those wounds and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And I saw that they had all disappeared from all parts of the limb.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I covered myself and incisions were made on one of those wounds until I had scraped away a piece of the bone, and I saw that that which was corrupted was already dry and rotten and putrefied; and already a part of the limb was corrupted before I had pierced into the marrow
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And so I completed what was necessary and prepared from the bone that I had discovered
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I said that it was not in the bone except for that corruption which had fled and I had cured, and I had already extracted it.</start_of_turn>
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And at that time I stopped the restoration of the wound with consolidated medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.</start_of_turn>
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And I repeated and discovered again on the bone according to the first discovery, and I saw that there was continuing corruption of the bone.</start_of_turn
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I saw that it appeared to me from that corruption, and at that time I had to make an opening to make the care and restoration, and it was not restored.</start_of_turn>
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu in le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat in las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat in ambulacio ni nocument in denguna causa.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Mays si es os eminent in loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	E si la corrupcio es in le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio in qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I say to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will need, which you will employ as simple means to perform the procedure that you will experience throughout this book.
Forma de serra:	Form of reply:
Forma de autra serra:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de autra serra:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de autra serra gran:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de ray:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Both heads of this needle follow the shape of a star-studded claw, and the points of the needle are like those of a needlepoint
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not attempt to bring them into contact with the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or with a wide open mouth
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de razori menor:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de razori lat:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The other needle should be made appropriately, with a broad arch and a keen point, and the hand of the needle should be placed downward at a right angle
Forma de lu:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The provided text contains medical instructions and does not relate to forming a response in the given context
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and acute-tipped.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and resembles all the causes that we have mentioned of razors, of scissors and of saws.</start_of_turn>
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the incision of the extremities to the closing of the bones.</start_of_turn
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are sometimes supported by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption for the care of those medicines and the care does not interfere, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the limb without you having inflicted any cause, when in that case you must suture that limb as soon as possible in order to prevent the disease from spreading due to death or malice that is more harmful to the limb.</start_of_turn
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that is that the limb is black inside before it is healed, or that it becomes pale almost black before the black has disappeared from that part of the limb which surrounds it and fills it up; and therefore you must know that you must suture that limb immediately.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And in the same way, if the cause of the corruption is a blow of some venomous causes such as a scorpion of the sea, or a viper, or a bite of a spider.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must suture the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to enter your hand.</start_of_turn>
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And in the same way, if you reach the hand, then you must suture from the root of the hair, and do not leave space for the corruption to enter until you have closed the wound in the hair of the arm.</start_of_turn
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you touch it, then you must suture the arm inside the groove at the joint.</start_of_turn
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if this happens again, the disease is mortal; and to administer another cause along with the treatment is useless.</start_of_turn
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And in the same way, if the corruption affects the toe, then you must suture that within one of the nails.</start_of_turn
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you prick the sole of the foot, then you will cut through the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If you pierce within the nail, then you will cut through the nail itself at the joint of the nail.</end_of_turn>
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the nail, then it is not sufficient to do anything but to dismiss it, and let the patient die.</end_of_turn>
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The manner of piercing the limb or cutting it is that you grasp the ligament behind which you wish to pierce, and grasp another ligament over the bone; extend the minister one ligament to the sides, and extend the minister another ligament on the other side; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without damage until the whole flesh is uncovered; and then pierce or cut.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And take care that the blood from all sides is absorbed so that it does not touch the bone, and that the patient suffers adjusted injury and afterwards apply cautery.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If blood flows excessively when working, then you cauterize the area superficially, or stop them until the blood vessels are narrowed; and then return to your medication until completion.</end_of_turn
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected limb with a ligament as desired, and care for him until he is healed.</end_of_turn>
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I urge you that in such an emergency you summon a man skilled in this matter, this man whom I recommended to you, who knows how to handle such an accident without causing greater damage than was originally present.</end_of_turn>
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption is first of all in the toe until it extends throughout the foot.</end_of_turn>
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for this and when he comes he will care for the limb with great diligence, so that the pain and suffering of the limb will vanish, and he will pierce the foot at the joint, and restore health.</end_of_turn
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time that medicine has known this corruption in the thumb of the hand.</end_of_turn
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I saw that it was necessary for me to perform this procedure in order to stop the proliferation of this superfluousness which was placed upon the hand of the physicians, to prevent the corruption of the body; and it does not cause the proliferation, but it begins to abate from the thumb inwards as soon as it starts from the hand.</end>
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And I was ordered to pierce the hand, and I did not fear the result of that superfluousness, for I thought that it would be safer to leave the hand dead than to risk the benefit of the patient.</end_of_turn
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he awoke from his sleep, he returned to his home and I learned that that man had prepared and pierced his hand throughout, and he was healed.</end_of_turn
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not told this story except to show what happens in this ailment, and what is its significance, and for what purpose it is useful.</end_of_turn
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Take care without negligence and with the quality of your treatment like a doctor.</end_of_turn>
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a fleshy limb, the space of the abscess is prolonged until collection of pus is complete, and then it is broken and pierced, and the pus is expelled from it, and the limb is left as it was before, as if it were a vessel, and the bone that is under it is slightly bent, and there is no further corruption, and no damage is done to the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a wound, and it is not named an abscess.</end_of_turn
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until the corruption spreads to some limb, then it is called an abscess and not a wound.</end_of_turn
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment of this is that you should pierce that bone throughout as if it were revolted, and more so when it is slightly bent and is useful like a mark, and comfort yourself that it does not adhere to the bone due to its corruption.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the bone will adhere and that the corruption will not cause further damage, and if the bone has already become loose, then you should care for the wound.</end_of_turn
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you must consider the patient, and if he is great, and if the limb that you are examining has a foul odor, then you should cauterize that limb with Egyptian medicine which is of olive oil and vinegar and vinegar of roses, and you should apply it in a vessel and cover it over fire until the medicine is complete and has reached its due point of specification.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cauterize the limb with that, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine on it for two hours.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And thus extract that which is spread around; and do so until the pain has disappeared and the swelling has subsided.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	The liquid is to be treated with ashes from the vinegar, when not being used for this remedy; and that you take vinegar and put it on them; and thus join that with the vinegar until you feel that the pain has passed away.</end_of_turn>
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the vinegar with ashes, then do this: clusterize the vinegar and honey together and add some powdered zinc, and clusterize the vinegar and honey together, because the property of honey is to soften and cleanse, and the vinegar makes the swelling adhere to the bone, and more so when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness.</end_of_turn>
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this to the liquid several times and you feel that the pain has subsided, then clusterize the liquid that makes the flesh swell.</end_of_turn
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take a dose of diaphoretic medicine and dissolve that oil of rosemary in vinegar; or clusterize that liquid with any other medicines that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on medicines.</end_of_turn>
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the bone is narrow in which the catheter of the cluster is not received, then enlarge that space little by little, and place in it gauze soaked in Egyptian or basilic ointment until it is enlarged.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the opening is wide, then suture the edges of it and leave them as much as is necessary for the amount of liquid that will remain inside the cluster.</end_of_turn
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the limb from which the pain originates is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that area around the bone that is below in order that the limb may be drawn inwards, because when the limb is contracted in the bend of the bone, the flesh is pressed against it.</end_of_turn
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the bone within the cavity of the limb as you wish, then you must perforate that you prepare the limb with the preparation for which the limb is voluntarily drawn outwards as you are accustomed, and that no obstacle be retained in the limb.</end_of_turn>
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are to be applied to the convenient area of the bone until you wish to extend those over the margin of the limb.</end_of_turn
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the mark should be of such great quantity as to communicate the whole extent of the bone; and thus draw across the edge of the opening of the bone a mark wider than the opening of the bone; and extend over another mark of the limb the number of threads corresponding to the quantity of the mark, and pause over that for a long position of the opening of the bone so that the swelling of the limb is relieved from the pressure of the bone and is not pressed too much but rather almost just as much as for two days in a row.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May the one who is over the opening of the bone, which you must leave for an hour in order that it should heal, keep that which is adjusted in it from the limb.</end_of_turn>
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if that which comes out of the limb is thick or thin, or is digested or undigested.</end_of_turn
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And concerning the location of that bone, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is swelling.</end_of_turn
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter that is gathered over the opening of the bone has already adhered, or has proper adherence, then you must remove it or perform a third day, and when you remove the dressing, change the bandage and renew the ointment.</end_of_turn
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May there not be any subtle virus nearby the bone, for you must not be discouraged by the adherence of the dressing, because the healing of the limb is proper, because some people take a long time to generate flesh in the wounds, and in those in which it is useful to the contrary.</end_of_turn
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the limb has remained unmoving for several days, the bone will not adhere; and if the adherence of the bone is delayed and is the cause of the prolongation, then you must adjust with the evacuation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humified in their substance and in their power, they are as dry as vinegar, when adjusted with an excessive addition of salt.</end_of_turn
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the thing that must not be omitted which is cured, is that you take a dose of diaphoretic medicine and dissolve it in oil of rosemary, and pour it on that, and mix that with vinegar of an equal amount in its substance, and do so to that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And thus make it similar in that action, when not to the limb, take diaphoretic medicine, honey when it is cold until it is absorbed, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them all up and powder them over the honey when it is lukewarm, and pour that over the wound and bind that over the bone; and pour that over the honey that has already been absorbed until it is absorbed, and powder that over the wound and bind that.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Every herb is administered along with long-standing aristology and the reason of the celestial lily (and it is the celestial lily) and barley flour and centaury, and use of these simples or adjusted, crush them and sprinkle over honey which I have recommended; and drink of it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the pain persists for a long time, and it is not suitable for this treatment, it is understood that the corruption is in the bowels, and already makes inquiry among the bones or in other firm members or ligaments; then treat it with fistular care, as it is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment of swelling and inflammation of nails added with incision of the finger and section
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Swelling is a swelling that does not leave the nail of the finger or toe, and it extends to other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its treatment is less valuable, or it is a swelling of a swelling, or it is corrupted, and it emits a stench until it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts the whole, and it is harmful to the limb when it is at the odor, and its color is harmful yellow.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that which we have said in the division and you do not comply with your treatment, it is understood that you must instill with all your might the whole abundance that is removed from the nail and then cauterize the ulcer nearby as much as necessary, because the cautery will not be useful in this case.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	More if the bone is soft and the nail is sound, and the surrounding parts of the nail have already begun to decay, and to puncture them and remove them, when you cover the edge of the nail that you are cutting with the finger of your hand, and you push it forward and cut it with the knife, and leave over what remains of the flesh of the remedies that burn away the corrosive ones until it is all gone; and treat that which remains until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	More if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, it is understood that you must instill it and extract it, for no time is it healthy that the bone is corrupted.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corruption and the decay go down to the finger, it is understood that you must cut it out at one of the nails as soon as you remember it, and treat that which remains until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	More if the nail has percussion or injury, and if there is violent pain, it is understood that you must at the beginning apply cold compresses to the patient, and then dry the nail with a fine sponge or a sharp knife, and take care that the incision does not penetrate the flesh that is left under the nail, because you will cause the violent pain, and if you do this you will cause the adjusted flesh to be superfluous in the place; and treat that area with that which relieves pain.</end_of_turn
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	More said adjusted, which is born in the most of households, is very fleshy all around, and is only in the bones, or is in the nail.</end_of_turn>
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And the swellings of them are born in the root of the joint, or is the birth of them in the bones of the fingers.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	More the one that is born in the bones of the finger does not hurt, and the one that is born in the joints is painful.</end_of_turn
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy, the incision is slight, and it is that you must instill that which must remove its root with a blunt spatula.</end_of_turn
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More of that which is born in the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult; and therefore take care of the excision of it.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More if it is born in the finger you must at the beginning cover the flesh with the incision round about the bone, and then grasp with one of those sharp knives convenient to that, and treat that which remains until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More consolidation that happens to the fingers between their joints due to the vegetation of herbs or for the birth of the fetus that does not depart, or for consolidation of pus or for burning of fire, or for remaining, it is understood that you must remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And also stop between their cloths with olive oil so that they do not become permanently consolidated, and separate between them, or put between them a layer of soft lead until it is consolidated as much as necessary.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly if consolidation happens in the bones of the hand with the palm, it is understood that you must dry that consolidation as it is prepared and agree to the figure of the limb.</end_of_turn
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the incision of vices, so are varicose veins.</end_of_turn
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose veins, and they are veins that are wrapped around and are full of thick, black bile-like fluids that circulate in the limbs of the body, and their greatest advancement is in the veins of the travelers and the laborers and the porters.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May the care of them be by two methods: one is that it be without sense and that the black bile be driven out, and the other method is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is performed in this manner: grasp the beginning of the limb with lukewarm water until the thick bile is resolved, which is beneficial for the limb, and then stretch the limb of the patient to the upper part of the thigh, to the outside of the hip joint, with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or in two, or in three in a wide incision, and then raise the black bile to the lower part of the thigh towards the genitals, and let it go in juice, until the amount that you wish and which you often see in the vomit is discharged, and which will tolerate the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And do the same with the other, and command them to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure for vomiting when the veins are full and until the patient notices it
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May the elevation of them be performed in this manner: you elevate the limb of the patient, if there is movement in it, and then put it in water and grasp the limb of the patient with lukewarm water until it swells and the veins are relaxed; or that it be exercised with great exercise, if water is not at your disposal, until the limb is blistered
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And at the end of the vein cut the cord in the groin or at the back of the limb must be given the denticle, or in the lower part of the limb you must do the same
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And cover the wound with a bandage and scour the vein throughout until it appears, and when the appearance of it is such that it sometimes asks to be black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore when you avoid it and the cord sometimes turns white, it is cord
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And at the same time put your hand under it so that it is elevated and held away from the cord, and suspend it with an onion or sponge
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And make another incision nearby that one for three fingers, and then scour the cord from the part below the vein until it appears
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And elevate it and incision that must be given at the rear must be given the talus, and at the same time extract that and elevate it until it is discharged through the second incision, and at the same time extract that from the first incision
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do the same until you extract that from the highest part or from all the incisions, until all is discharged; and when the incisions are made
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to order to extract and elevate, then put in a strong double needle and tie that, or put your hand under it and rotate your hand throughout until it is bled dry
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And keep in mind that it must not be injured; for if it is broken, it is useful for you to be unable to elevate that and it is harmful to the patient for that night.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that is all outside, the doctor should rest on the place of the wound with a soft cloth soaked in wine and olive oil, and care for that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted has not suffered any discomfort of which it is surrounded, and is not according to the rule that we have said, then the doctor must cover that he makes the incisions throughout the parts of the discomfort of them and the places of their covering, and at the same time suspend that with an onion until he elevates that whole thing.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And keep in mind your incision must not be made on the vein and that you do not touch that, because if you do it will be difficult for you to elevate that; and use your prudence in that
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident in which the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of a sponge:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not like sponges or acute extremities so that it does not touch the vein; and it has great flexibility like a lion, because if it were soft, it would break the vein by its softness; having it in this way is enough for its great size as we have said
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the thigh vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the limbs in the lower parts just like the al-Ategi in the Arabian lands and in the arid lands of India with little humidity and in the ones where there is neither grass nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	The pain is also often engendered in other parts of the body by other wounds.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The cause of such disease is the corruption of the blood, which brings about the swelling of the body like serpents and worms, and causes the appearance of boils and worms between the flesh and bone.</end_of_turn>
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the impending arrival of this disease is that the veins which lie under the swelling become inflamed; and their vessels are seen; and they begin to swell from the point where the swelling first appeared, as if they were rooted to the ground.</end_of_turn>
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the limb appears, then cover that part with a plum whose weight is equal to two drachmas. Enter two drachmas, and notice that and leave the plum suspended from the limb.</end_of_turn>
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times as you see these things in other parts of the body, cover them with lead and notice that.)</end_of_turn
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is not prolonged, then remove a part of the swelling and cover the rest; do not remove that which is outside and has gone dry, for if you remove that which is still raw and enters the bone, it will cause further swelling and ulcers.)</end_of_turn
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For it must be treated gently and gradually, until it is finally expelled from behind the bone and does not leave any remaining cause in the body.)</end_of_turn
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein is exuded in lumps which are about five palms and a thumb long, and I have already known of one that was twenty palms long.)</end_of_turn
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is discovered at the time of treatment, then introduce the needle into the marrow of the bone and pierce it along the length of the bone until all that is in the cavity is evacuated, and administer putrefying agents to the wound for several days with medicines; and finally care for the wound for the healing of ulcers.)</end_of_turn
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein often causes swelling, especially when it appears at the ankle or foot, and causes great pain, and is engendered of some ulcer or wound.)</end_of_turn
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore care for it as we have said above in the division and as regards what has been said.)</end_of_turn
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	It is called bovine gout when worms are generated under the skin and appear on the surface.)</end_of_turn
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine gout in every land and is called by us bovine disease because it does not appear among the common people, but is found between the flesh and bone, and spreads throughout the body, causing swelling of the limbs and deforming the bones, and is recognized by the sensation of swelling in the limbs until the bone is fractured and the marrow is expelled.)</end_of_turn
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the cause of this disease is the corruption of some humors as well as the appearance of worms and serpents and worms and scorpions in the belly.)</end_of_turn
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and is elevated to the head, it causes great pain, and when it arrives it breaks the head and destroys the brain, and that is what causes the swelling.)</end_of_turn
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, you must not do so without having previously recognized its limb and its appearance, and when you see that it has become soft and flabby and has caused great swelling, and that there is strong stiffness and swelling around it, and that it is necessary to dry it up and extract it.)</end_of_turn
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is prolonged in the bone and you do not remove it, then you must place a cautery over the area until it stops, and the greatest cause of fear is the corruption of the bone as we have said.)</end_of_turn
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May in such cases as these the patient be treated with great care and given stricture of diet, and dry up the area with a cautery, and extract the stone; and that the disease use its natural means of eliminating harmful humors, and take care of nourishment that does not generate putrefying matter.)</end_of_turn
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From section over the gout.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land nafir, and it is a pain that is seen in various limbs, and is usually transferred from limb to limb.)</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already told you what I recommend concerning this.)</end_of_turn>
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a woman who was suffering from a disease at a village, and I saw that her arm was swollen and that there was a small swelling in the funis vein of the arm, and when I left an hour later, I saw that the swelling had disappeared just as quickly as it had appeared, as if it had never been there.)</end_of_turn
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I put on the area of the pain and fixed it to the muscle, and then I stay here for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I proceed to the other side until I reach the other arm.</start_of_turn>
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommend that you rotate the body as much as you see fit; and do not marvel at the movement of the limbs and the speed of the members.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I have already seen that in these matters according to that manner, however I have seen many who experience pain when the limbs are shifted from limb to limb.</start_of_turn
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	They do not see that in the thighs like in the palm of the hand.</start_of_turn
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is anything other than that the thigh was old, where there are many bones and veins exposed, and in this there appears that sensation of violent movement.</start_of_turn
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear according to this retrograde movement in those who are delicate and have humors full of veins obscured.</start_of_turn
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you desire the care of them, and the patient has that pain, then do not be afraid of its appearance as we have said, but rather strengthen your hand over that area and leave it hanging and dry over that until the violent movement is calmed, and cauterize the area.</start_of_turn
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not see it in the thighs, when you care for it, know that it is the exudesion of the body and that which expels violence, and praise those who take those purulent pills and those of serapi and similar.</start_of_turn
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.</start_of_turn
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the locations of the body in which they are cast, because their diversity is that some have great heads, and small, and concave, and blunt; so are solid; and those that have three angles, and those that have tongues; and those that have bars.</start_of_turn
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the limbs and the parts in which it is cast is according to two methods: because the limbs or the main limbs with cause, as for example the brain, the heart, the liver, the lung, the veins, the bones, and the bladder; and therefore when you catch in some of these limbs and it appears to you that death will follow, which I recommend that you do immediately, that you avoid the extraction of that arrow in those in whom death is already in those in which in the greatest precautions, and when it does not appear to you that these symptoms are present, and the arrow is not obscured in the depth of the limb, then you shall extract that and cure the wound.</start_of_turn
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And from the symptoms of the servant is when you catch the arrow in them, and it breaks their bones, that it is sitting on the cyst that is over the brain, because it causes them to be swollen with swelling, and spitting, and dizziness, and redness in the limbs, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and great strength is lost from the voice, and is destroyed from the place of the wound white moisture resembling slime, and becomes like the consistency of blood.</start_of_turn
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these symptoms appear to you, then you must abstain from the care and extraction of the arrow, if not outside.</start_of_turn
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the symptoms of the arrow when it catches in the heart, so that it is close to the left breast, and that it is fixed in a solid cause, and is not a frivolous cause; and that the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of blood, and runs like black plague, and if it reaches that degree of coldness of the limbs, and excessive sweating, and fainting; and therefore you must know that death approaches immediately.</start_of_turn
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung are that it is almost filled with blood and that the veins that are under the chest are closed, and the color of the sickness is changed, and great breath is exhaled, and asks for fresh air.</start_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow catches in the membrane that is in the heel, and the pain is that of the small vertebrae, and it causes great swelling with great pain and swelling, and does not move any of the muscles.</start_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow catches in the stomach, then great strength is lost from the wound going on with any digestion.</start_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow catches in the belly and is fixed there, no hope is left for the cure of the extraction of the arrow.</start_of_turn
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the arrow hits the bladder, and the urine is forced outside of it, and the cause of this is known to be outside, and there is great pain in the abdomen, it is clear that this is a mortal wound.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members also suffer in the same way as the face, the ear, the throat, the spleen, the testicles, the ribs, the breastbone, the shoulder, the arm, and the leg. They are saved only when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not venomous.</end_of_turn>
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I would recommend that you learn about the nature of these arrows, for it is a sign of your care for your health.</end_of_turn>
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is that in a healthy person an arrow was shot into the eye socket of the nose at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side. I left the pupil of the eye untouched, and he is healthy and has not suffered any damage to his eye.</end_of_turn
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a boy who had shot it into the gray of his eye socket. I left the eyelid untouched, and the arrow was already hidden, and we did not manage to remove it until a small piece of it adhered to the bone of the eyebrow. It was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion’s head on it, without any pupil.</end_of_turn>
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And thus the boy was healed, and has not suffered any damage to his eye.</end_of_turn
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who had been shot in the throat. It was an Arabian arrow, and there were pupils in it. And when I inquired about it between two guides, I found that it had already sunk into the throat of the Christian. And I took it out cautiously, and the Christian was healed.</end_of_turn
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in the belly. I thought he would surely die from it. And when three days had passed and there was no improvement in his condition, I inquired about the arrow and found it. The man was healed, and he did not suffer any further damage.</end_of_turn
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And there was another man in whom an arrow was shot into both legs, and the plague was confirmed on him. And when I approached to see him after seven days, I found the arrow at the root of the thigh.</end_of_turn
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And there was a woman who had been shot with an arrow in the belly, and the plague was confirmed on her. And she has not improved in her condition even after remaining in bed for a long time, and she does not suffer from any natural ailments.</end_of_turn
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man who had been shot with an arrow in the face, and the plague was confirmed on him. The arrow was removed, but no pain was felt, and his condition did not worsen.</end_of_turn
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the princeps of the king who had been shot in the middle of his nose. The arrow had already begun to decline on the right side, and it was completely hidden.</end_of_turn
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to attend to his care within three days of the arrow entering.</end_of_turn
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And when I arrived I found the plague of the arrow not very severe; and when I asked about the cause of this, he did not feel any pain. However, he still felt a slight puncture mark at the root of the arrow, and I hoped that this was simply the mark of the arrow.</end_of_turn
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	I applied to him an ointment composed of an astringent and digestive virtue, confident that the wound would disappear as a result of my application, because I saw the tip of the arrow protruding from the wound.</end_of_turn
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	The wound did not suffer any significant damage from the arrow. I continued to apply the ointment to him for several days, and there was no further accident. The plague gradually disappeared, and the patient was cured of the pain caused by the arrow within a few days.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And when I had finished with the acute corrosive medicine, I waited for a while, and when I had finished with that I took hold of the tip of the arrow and pulled it out.</start_of_turn
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	I adjusted the dressing for the plague for that medicine, and when I saw the tip of the arrow clearly, I left it for a while.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	When the plague had become more pronounced, I thought of removing the arrows myself with forceps. I delayed this, however, and continued to handle it with care for several days, until one day I managed to remove the arrow without causing further damage.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and when that is restored, the plague is solidified, and the patient is completely healed, and it does not return in him in any way.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some needles so that you can pause what is customary and significant about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by this narration or are not included in it.</end_of_turn>
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the learned artists compare little with the poor; and in what is present they are absent in what is lacking; and they find a new operation and a new instrument that must be descended from the external causes of the art when it occurs.</end_of_turn
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore I say that needles are not expelled from the members in which they are placed, but in two ways: either by attraction of the tissue in which they are entangled; or on the contrary of the other part.</end_of_turn
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is expelled from the tissue where it is introduced, or is a needle proceeding from a fleshy place, is thrown out and expelled.</end_of_turn
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey this time of the day when the cat is castrated, the hour is over that you must leave it for a few days until the flesh that is around it is softened, and the attraction of it and its egress is relieved.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is pierced in bone and you do not obey this time, leave it for a few days and repeat that until the attraction and movement in each day is over, and it is expelled.</end_of_turn
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey this time for almost a whole day, the hour covers that you perforate in the circuit of the needle in that bone of the whole part with a soft touch until the tissue is enlarged by the needle, and then extract that.</end_of_turn>
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the needle is pierced in the bone of the head and has already gone through one of the bellies of the brain, and appears in the illness along with those accidents that I and others have said, the hour abandons the extraction of the needle and leaves that until it is equal to almost a whole day; for if the needle persists in the brain, the hour does not prolong the death.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the needle is only pierced in the body of the bone and does not pass into the brain, and remains in the illness for a few days, and no accident occurs to it from those accidents, the hour praises your skill in the attraction of the needle and in the attraction of the pain.</end_of_turn
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if it is not pierced and you do not obey the extraction, the hour administers soft touches in the circuit of the needle just as we have recommended, and take care of the tissue until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Maybe if the needle is already hidden in the body, and is hidden from the feeling, the hour inquires about that and if you sit down, the hour pulls that which is convenient for the attraction of it.</end_of_turn
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the period, and here it is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, the hour finishes concerning the plague until it is amplified and the needle can be extracted.</end_of_turn
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have something to do with those which are tenacious, the hour delivers the flesh in which it is pierced throughout the whole part with all the skill you can; and think about it, if you cannot do about the escape of the flesh in the fracture of the nails and in twisting those until you obey.</end_of_turn
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the needle in any place, the hour uses with all its might both its hand and forceps until it makes that obey; and suggest that with great care that the needle is not broken and that it is effectively pulled out by your difficult attraction and extraction.</end_of_turn
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that of your hour, the hour leaves for a few days until the parts that are in the circuit of it are softened, and then repeat that until the hour is relieved.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Maybe if your work contradicts the flow of salvation, the hour administers what we have said of care in the head.</end_of_turn
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your prudence from the knowledge of veins or nerves or strings, and administer skill in every way possible to facilitate the escape of the needle; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and calmness as I and you have recommended.</end_of_turn
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore you must counteract the needle so that the illness is according to the figure according to which you must treat the case of the needle in it, for that is more beneficial.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	May it be so, if it is not possible for you, then administer whatever is possible for the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But if the arrows that are outside are opposed by the other side, or that already from these has proceeded any side to the sides outside, or makes the limb stiff; then you should cut off the limb below the knee and sometimes above; and do so according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then draw out that which is fayta with the cautery.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you should twist the limb according to the hardness of the bone until the arrow breaks against the bone, and expand it to the middle, and then extract that.</end_of_turn
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it there for a few days, and then repeat it until it comes out.</end_of_turn>
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the blood of the arrow is in that, then you must prick that with your finger.</end_of_turn
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the blood is clotted and you wish to administer an impulse, then you must insert the finger and that, if it is blind, touch the cavity so that between the cavity of the limb and the base of the arrow, and then prick that with your finger.</end_of_turn
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then you must prick that with your finger inwards, because the arrow is relieved by that.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisonous, then you must cover all the flesh in which it is seen, if it is possible with water, and then care for that with water that you consider convenient.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close to so that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut off above that, then cut off above that and keep yourself away from veins or nerves, and extract that, and then compress it if necessary, and care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which the arrows are drawn:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends are like the beak of a sparrow that are faytas like a saw when they take hold of the arrow so that it does not slip.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are of various sizes, large, small and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and the scarcity of the wound, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction of it.</end_of_turn
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Method of pressing inwards of this limb conquavas like the beak of a bird to relieve the inner part of the arrow in it, and impulse of that blind:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of pressing inwards of the blind limb:</start_of_turn>
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like a ray so that the inner part of the arrow in the concave one is relieved and is pushed inwards.</start_of_turn
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of venipuncture.</start_of_turn
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which it is usually bled are those of the forearm or the leg.</start_of_turn of which there are sixteen in the head.</start_of_turn so there are two pulse veins that are close to the wrists, which are called albas; two herbs that are in the two temples that appear; and two veins in two tear ducts of two holes that are called aspicient; and the vein prepared in the middle of the face, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guide veins that are at the collarbone; and two veins that are in the lips above; and two veins that are in the lips below; and these are the veins that are called algelic; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.</start_of_turn
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are bled in the arms are worth five.</start_of_turn because there is a cephalic one, which is the most lateral one; and the people call “the head vein”, and it is blind, and is a medium vein, and is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalic; and they call that “the vein of all the body”, and basilica is a vein that is formed in the domestic belly, and is called “citillar”, and they call that “the belly vein” among the vulgar; and the funis of the arm, and is formed over the elbow, and that is the one that is bled, and is that which appears over the elbow for appearance.</start_of_turn
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the ankle there are three veins; one of which is that which is below the curvature of the little toe of the lateral side; and the second is soft, and its place is below the ankle of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the ankle of the lateral side; and in the ankle there are other veins similar to those.</start_of_turn
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The support of the veins that are close to the ankles is due to catarrh of the ancient times, emigration, suppuration and ulcers of the head from ancient times.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And as for the quality of the bleeding in these cases, I recommend that you do this: let the patient raise their head above the level of the illness, and let the head of the patient be slightly lower than the ankles at the level of the veins that are close to the ankles; then tighten the patient's clothing around them with a bandage that will cover the two areas where the veins are wide open; and if you want to know whether this is enough, ask the patient if they feel the pain diminishing.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the pointed lancet, and that which is most penetrating, and put your finger into that vein in the groin where the phlebitis comes out to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand over the vein and the groin to the sides and puncture the vein at the start of the incision
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision is the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; do as much as you like of the blessing.</start_of_turn>
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And tighten around it with powder and leave that which is inside so that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And indeed, before doing anything else, make the incision of these and cauterize them.</start_of_turn>
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More than the two veins that are at the temples which help with phlebitis is an ancient emigration of bad blood and congestion of the veins and tumors of excess fluid in the heels.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And as for the quality of phlebitis in these cases, I recommend that you do this: tighten the patient's clothing around them with a bandage that will cover the two veins when they are clearly visible and feel the pain diminish; and if you ask them if they feel the pain diminishing, they will tell you.</start_of_turn
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And raise the groin over the vein to the sides as I have told you, and make the phlebitis incision from the outside inwards, and raise the vein up; and puncture it as you have done with the other two veins; and do as much of the blessing as you need.</start_of_turn
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And remove the covering of the patient, and leave your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place your hand over that cover and powder and tighten that around them strongly, and leave that which is inside so that it is healed.</start_of_turn
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And indeed, the memory of these things has already passed, and the incision and the attraction in the beginning of the freedom.</start_of_turn
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the support of the phlebitis of the vein of the forehead is close to the phlebitis of the cephalic vein to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigration, swelling and ulcers of pus.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And as for the quality of the phlebitis in these cases, I recommend that you do this: let the patient tighten their clothing around them with a bandage that will make the vein visible; and take the instrument called forceps of which this is the shape.</start_of_turn
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture at the peak which is at the head of the forceps over that vein and pierce it either forwards or backwards in the manner of doing so, and let the blood run out as much as you wish; and then remove the perforation of the patient and tighten that which is inside so that it is healed.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Every vein which is opened with phlebitis is usually opened with a broad incision, but it does not mean that the phlebitis is of acute extremity as well as the others; for it may be of remote extremity, and phlebitis which is according to the traverse, because the bone is very close and strong in it when it is slight.</start_of_turn
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More support is given by the two veins that are at the tears of two heels for scabby discharge of the heel for swelling and pus in the heel, and to the maladies of the face.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebitis is that the patient tightens their clothing around them with a bandage, and you remain standing over their head.</start_of_turn
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebitis is successful according to the traverse from a little distance to a little distance, for in the place it is not solid; and if the phlebitis is slight, the limb is fractured.</start_of_turn
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And do as much of the blessing as you need, and leave your hand over that area for a night, and tighten those tightly again, and remove those.</start_of_turn
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More the phlebitis of the vein of the nose is with acute fever and violent sweating, and to the maladies of the face and emigration and swelling that happen in the face, and especially when it is ancient.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the flebotomy of the patient is that the patient groans with pain and places his hand on my left hand, and I take a subtle flebotomy that lasts a long time and remains in the middle of the nose according to the rule, so that the vein does not appear to the sense here, and that the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Since you have finished with the flebotomy little by little, make the blood flow according to your need; and keep that up for a night, for that is restored with delight.</end_of_turn>
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	More useful is the flebotomy of the two veins to constrict urine and the commencement of leprosy and spots of illness, and itch and harmful ulcers corrosive just as if it were herpes.</end_of_turn>
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the flebotomy of these is that the patient groans with pain and leaves something in his bowels along with the ligament; and stay the artisans over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.</end_of_turn
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And do the flebotomy of the vein along with the wide flebotomy little by little; and extract blood according to a temperate quantity or according to how many times it is necessary that is at the same time; and make it similar to the other vein.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the ligament and tighten the two veins somewhat more so that the patient is not provoked, and leave it inside until the swelling is healed.</end_of_turn>
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the flebotomy of the veins is to relieve small boils and pimples of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the throat.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the flebotomy of these is that you will make the patient groan in front of you, and tighten his bowels with a bandage, and then rotate his lips and close two veins of which one is from the right lip and the other from the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of both, and more so when in the circuit of these two veins there are many small black veins; and where it incides is as it incides.</end_of_turn>
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt about something, leave it to me, and do not know which of these to choose, when you understand the incision of the greater of these, and the pus manifests of these.</end_of_turn
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it similar to the two veins that are in the lips outside.</end_of_turn
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is usually better to puncture the two veins that are in the lip left.</end_of_turn
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More useful are two veins than the left ones is the flebotomy of the cephalic vein to prevent affections that are in the gullet, to the illness of the uvula, and to the illness of the mouth.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bleeding these is that it follows the patient between his teeth before he spits out the blood, and raises the tongue, and leave the tongue from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declining towards black.</end_of_turn
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bleed each one; and take care that you do not touch the vein with your hand, because it is an artery.</end_of_turn
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins which are bled in this wound are those which usually run in all men, and the flebotomy of them is useful in two ways, or one can make a superficial incision or by cutting at a moderate distance; or by cutting deeply, and if there is anything in the wound, and this is the way to do it.</end_of_turn
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is that you must resort to incision and to those same species of cuts and subtleties according to the breadth of the veins and according to the stricture of them.</end_of_turn
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of superficial incision:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Both sides of the vein are like this when it is necessary, and you must open the apparent large veins that contain thick blood.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way of making a deep incision:</start_of_turn>
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This flebotomy is of less breadth and of deeper extent, and you must bleed small veins that contain thin blood.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	More useful is the flebotomy of the basilica vein which is one of the three veins: which extracts the blood from the affections that are left in the gullet and the belly, and from what is left of the feet and the belly.</end_of_turn
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And you must order the phlebotomist, when he does that, that he should take care of that and be more temperate in that, because if he does not he will pierce the artery and will cause the blood to flow, so that you must not phlebotomize that way, but rather by cutting as before.</end_of_turn
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the swelling does not appear visibly, then lay aside that limb and move to the other, or seek some other limb; or that you may find the swelling at the end of the arm, which is also evident; then cut away that part which is swollen just as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform a lithotomy of the limb, then first loosen the bandage that is touching the area inside the limb, and then place a bandage over it firmly; and then tie the limb and cut the vein where it is swollen just as we have said; and keep pressure on the area until the bleeding stops.</end_of_turn>
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you have stretched the ligament, swelling in the place that you have marked with a bandage, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid that.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if sometimes during the lithotomy you see urine flowing like that of a child, then the urine is yellow, which is a sign that it is the urine of the artery; and therefore you must stop and pause the bleeding for a long time; and then take hold of the bleeding again, and if the bleeding is stopped, which means that the clot has been separated, then strengthen the limb and leave it alone.</end_of_turn>
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the patient's urine, and be over-cautious with it, and do not leave it for a long time until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the bleeding has not been stopped, and sometimes even when you do not find a doctor there, then you must ligate the artery if you see it; for the limb is contracted, and the clot is separated; or that you take a short forceps, grasp that, and press that over the area of the vein where there is a constriction of the ligament and the powder within until the next day.</end_of_turn
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the clot is separated, it is well; otherwise, care for that which precedes the recollection of the place of the separated clots until the flow of urine returns to normal.</end_of_turn
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The separation of the artery is difficult in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of injury to the limb's ligament.</end_of_turn>
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More importantly, the lithotomy is useful in extracting the stone from the upper part of the bladder and from the lower part of the body; for it is composed of the branches of the basilica and the branches of the cephalic artery, as we have said.</end_of_turn
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	Take care of the lithotomist who is over-cautious during the lithotomy, for there is a nerve there; and if you prick the lithotomy and damage the nerve, you will cause him to lose sensation, and it will be difficult to heal him, and often it is not possible to heal him completely.  This nerve is often hidden from view by fat and is almost invisible; and if it is covered by someone who is not skilled and is subtle and does not show, then you must stop the lithotomy at the point where you see the bleeding, and avoid the nerve with your strength.</end_of_turn
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you must cut the vein lengthwise.</end_of_turn
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of lithotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts the stone from the head and relieves the suffering of the heels.</end_of_turn
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this way, if you wish, the lithotomy can be performed through the flank or through the groin; for this is the safest way of all, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left injured.</end_of_turn
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must know that during the lithotomy you must not prick the head of the bone only, but seek the place that is most painful, and do not be afraid of it, if it is not immediately found on the first percussion that there is some swelling on the lithotomy.</end_of_turn
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	It is often forgotten in some people, when it is not found at the first percussion, but it is not neglected in the present case.</end_of_turn
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the lithotomy of that and its accidents must be considered in their rectification.</end_of_turn
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that lithotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health and in hope of its success and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that it is useful lithotomy in one of the veins that is in the groin, that is: cephalic, femoral or basilica; and that it is useful lithotomy at the beginning of spring, after sunrise in the morning and in autumn in the evening, and in winter when there are signs of repletion.</end_of_turn
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it is useful to lithotomize every third day or the first after sunrise, for three hours have passed by.</end_of_turn
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May the flebotomy be administered promptly, for it is more effective when it causes convenience and necessity at any time of the day or night.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let it be known that it should not be performed too soon after the fourteenth year, and that in women it should not be performed before the seventh month after delivery, and in the old it should not be performed at all.</end_of_turn>
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be bled for any reason whatsoever, let them modify their veins beforehand with a lion's clisteer, if there is any retained wound, so that the veins do not pull out the superfluous humors during the bleeding of the veins, which are pressed, and do not harm the principal members.</end_of_turn>
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let them not be bled when they are suffering from sacred fever or cramps, or from an evil disease or from dropsy, until such time as the cause of their suffering has disappeared, neither from fever nor from excessive vomiting, or from excessive drinking or from a multitude of journeys or works or from excessive fasting or from any other cause that dissolves virtue, or be it bodily or spiritual.</end_of_turn
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider carefully the temperament of humors before bleeding, if the patient is robust with food and drink, and with medicines if possible.</end_of_turn
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And let them go into the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or be exercised by any exercise so that the patient be benefited.</end_of_turn
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the bleeding at the third hour of the day, as we have said.</end_of_turn>
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And know that the limb should be guarded on that day from all animal accidents, as from fear, wrath, fear, and from all bodily accidents, from work and excessive drinking and journeys and from every other cause.</end_of_turn
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And as for the scent, let the cause be present with the patient in accordance with the habits of men, with aromatic substances and perfumes and balms and scents according to the extent of the possibility.</end_of_turn
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the blederer with a cushion that is softer than the cushion of that which must be bled.</end_of_turn
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And pull out their arms, and anoint the bleeding area with their hand two or three times; and then tie the dressing with a cord and cover the area with two or three layers.</end_of_turn
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the restriction be temperate, neither too tight nor too loose, for the restriction when it is excessive prohibits the flow of blood; or when it is too loose, the patient will suffer pain.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the restriction is applied, let the patient rub their hands together between them until the veins become swollen, and declare it when feeling comfortable.</end_of_turn
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the bleeder anoint the bleeding limb with a little oil beforehand; and let them pause the hand indicating the vein from which the bleeding will be performed, so that the vein flees a little, and the percussion is dry so that there is no air in the vein which is being bled from, which is what causes swelling when the bleeding is stopped; and if the bleeding opens the vein, that is stretched.</end_of_turn
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, in order that the bleeding be stopped and be cured in all these things.</end_of_turn>
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And let them stop the bleeding immediately even if the vein is torn in a moment; for if not, you must repeat the procedure leaving that place a little while, or perform festination if the place is not clotted.</end_of_turn
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is clotted, or the disease spreads, let you leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the dressing, for it will cause fresh bruising, or do not enter the bath.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the bleeding if necessary.</end_of_turn
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the blood stops well, and you fear that it will not suffice, let you repeat the bleeding in that place according to custom and adjust the opening a little, and do what is necessary so that the place is clotted, for the place is clotted in many people in the event of a small opening.</end_of_turn
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	More often, however, if that has already clotted, do not repeat over it, for that will not be of any use; and pause over the remainder of the wound with oil, which will relieve the pain of the patient.</end_of_turn
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place than outside and than the other places.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Therefore, apply ointment of oil throughout the wound and tie the veins that are beyond the limit of the cure, for it makes the tyriaca softer and safer when one of them is taken away from the place, because the cure is subtle and is reversed when it is large.</end_of_turn>
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if there is great swelling in the wound, which causes blood clots to adhere, especially in the one that has not bled, or in the opening of the small vein, then you should cover it, and place over the place a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scorched, and hold it there for an hour, because it is dissolved.</end_of_turn
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that with the surrounding skin of the vein along with it or another vein.</end_of_turn>
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you remain in the place for several days, there will be some blackness or greenness; do not notice that. If you wish, place over the cause of the pain some dissolvent of aloes or marigold, or some cause of the juice of chamomile or buttercup or something like that.</end_of_turn>
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Blood clots adhere to swelling caused by wound healing of the basilica.</end_of_turn>
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore place your hand over that, and if you find pain, tighten your compression over that; for that swelling is harmful and bad. And so keep that you put over that any cause of that which we have said, for it will flow strongly from the sacred artery.</end_of_turn
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply ointment with oil that is astringent, so that the place is hardened, and take care of the other care along with this until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that you extract from the sacred at all times according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the wound over the sacred according as it appears.</end_of_turn
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the sacred is black, then you must leave it still until it is cured; and in the same way if you see it large, then you must leave it still until it is subtle; and in the same way if it is acute, until its intensity is gone.</end_of_turn
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And cover whoever is full and strong and has need of extracting the sacred in a wound, that the wound of the vein be widened and that it bleed laterally.</end_of_turn
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in the one who is pale, do the opposite of that, and cover that you extract it in small numbers, and that he take it directly.</end_of_turn
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	It is better to administer in the wound of the vein that it is the transverse section, not the puncture.</end_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of wound healing is saved from the flow of blood and the injury of nerves, and is more laudable and more safe than the wound healing according to breadth and length.</end_of_turn
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is customary to succeed without fainting, you must do the wound healing with a little piece of bread infused in wine of a thousand grains or of simple alum. Extract it three or four times.</end_of_turn
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold wound, then before doing the wound healing, prepare with eyewater of marigold or with eyewater of honey flavored with spices such as cinnamon, ginger and the like, or with scented and fragrant eyewater.</end_of_turn
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs, do the wound healing, for it is a cause of that lack of blood. Therefore cover that you give him lukewarm wine and fragrant eyewater; and use aromatic substances with some kind of food, and keep the feet of the patient at that level.</end_of_turn
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division of fainting for evacuation.</end_of_turn
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to see the result of the wound healing and dissolve the sacred according to the number, cover that from which the wound healing is for the evacuation of blood, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, as much as the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.</end_of_turn
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May whoever wants to see the result of the wound healing and dissolve the sacred according to age, and the patient's body is strong, then make the first wound healing approximately seven or eight hours after the first wound healing.</end_of_turn
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May whoever wants to extract the blood from the body contrary to the departure that it declines, cover that it happens on the second or third day.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May whoever in the body where there is no blood left is acute and causes fever, cover that you extract the blood from it once and extract a great amount of it, and amplify the opening until fainting occurs, for in this way you will have preserved all the conditions of wound healing; and that you place your hand over the area over which you must extract the blood, because if you do not do this, death may occur in place of fainting, for there are many who are ignorant and negligent when they are wound healers.</end_of_turn
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not be hasty when you wish to draw out the arm and discharge the urine, for the orifice of the vein is already closed, and it is difficult to expel the urine, because you must anticipate that great pain lies ahead, and that the extension of the urine is prolonged, which is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Hence the patient lies prone, because of the swelling according to the acute; or remain there with the sharpness of the swelling which is the coagulation of the urine in the orifice of the vein; or suspend treatment on that of mercury or saffron, and apply that which is lighter within until the urine comes out and settles.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is congested, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the congestion has subsided.</end_of_turn>
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary for you to evacuate the urine according to the need, and it is not excused, then place your hand on that part or in the other arm in another vein.</end_of_turn>
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein which is called the “funis of the arm” is swollen in the place of the flesh or the bone, when it is not grasped or hidden, because it is composed of those.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the swelling of these is that the patient introduces his hand into cold water until the heat has receded, and the vein becomes clearly visible.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then strengthen that ligament and that stricture slightly; and swell the swelling according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or along the length.</end_of_turn
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the opening be wide and your swelling be such that you can swell that over the wrist joint a little.</end_of_turn
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the urine is prohibited, then repeat the hand in cold water and let the urine run in the water until you have achieved your need.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	More so if you are in the summer days, for in that case you are excused from the repetition of the hand in cold water, and the more so is the maintenance of the body of the urine in cold water in winter.</end_of_turn>
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the swelling of this vein is more useful than all the others, for it has neither a pulsating vein nor nerves.</end_of_turn
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the swelling of the wrist is related to the diseases of the fetus.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the swelling of these is that you strengthen the hand with the ligament or with your hand, because you have put it in cold water, until the vein is swollen and is clearly visible at the same time; and swell that which is transverse; and if you do this to the whole it will not do any harm.</end_of_turn
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care not to touch your hand to the swelling, for you leave its nerves naked of flesh.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And repeat the hand in cold water and let the urine run in that, for if you do not repeat it in cold water, the urine will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.</end_of_turn
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the urine is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you pause over the vein oil and salt, so that it is not solidified too firmly; and keep pressing that you make a circle around all around.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	More useful is the swelling of the left hand, for it is related to the diseases of the belly.</end_of_turn
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same with the swelling of this vein as you have done with the other.</end_of_turn
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The benefit of the ascending vein from the swelling is for the diseases which are in the lower part of the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and the diseases of the veins and ulcers of the buttocks and old ulcers, and for their similar diseases.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the swelling of these is that the patient puts all his foot in cold water and makes over that friction until the veins become apparent; and he ties over the wrist joint with a bandage; and the part of the vein that appears must be grasped by the thumb and the four fingers.</end_of_turn
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore swell it up more widely or leave the bandage over the thumb and the four fingers; for this is better and more salt.</end_of_turn
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you swell that in the face of the foot, then you must guard the nerves that are left over that on the face of the foot, and suspend your swelling with that which you swell by the transverse, as if you were inciting it.</end_of_turn
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	The wound is severe.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Maybe if it is forbidden to immerse the limb in the cold water, you may bathe the foot in warm water and let the medicine run out through the opening that has been made
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the surgeon has made an error in the first attempt, then repeat the process a little further from the wound, where the tissue is solid; and do not fear the infection, but take care of the nerves as we have said
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And in the same way do the same thing to the other foot as well
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And concerning the sciatic nerve, as we have said, you must cut off the supply of the hairy part of the limb.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The support of the wound is to make an opening when it is for the healing of the burn.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the wound is that the patient should be bathed, and that the limb should be bound tight from the groin downwards to the ankle with a long strip of silk, which should not be seen except for the part that is inside the wound
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And thus when it appears, repeat the process as often as necessary according to the situation and the direction, and it is better; or if you wish, you can make an incision or excision, because the tissue is solid
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most homes not so bad; and if you find it like this, and it does not appear to be painful, then repeat the process with any limb, and that is the one that appears in the two feet beyond the thumb and the little finger
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Take care of the nerves, and let the medicine run out as much as you wish
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the tension and place your hand over the area of the wound to strengthen the limb, because the patient is cured.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From the instructions and qualities of the physicians.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The physicians are of corn, or of barley, or of ivy
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The treatment is done in two ways: one is by scarification and extraction of matter, and the other is by means of a scraping
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this scraping that is called scarification is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the wounds that are treated by scarification and extraction of matter are fourteen parts of the body, of which the first is the nail, which is at the end of the thumb; and the second part is the heel of the foot; and the third part is the area between the chin and the jaw; and the fourth part is the area from the eyebrows to the nose; and the fifth part is the area from the armpits to the navel; and the sixth part is the area from the nipples to the groin; and the seventh part is the area from the buttocks to the knees; and the eighth part is the area from the ankles to the toes; and the ninth part is the area from the wrist to the elbow; and the tenth part is the area from the elbow to the shoulder; and the eleventh part is the area from the knee to the thigh; and the twelfth part is the area from the hip to the buttocks; and the thirteenth part is the area from the ankle to the calf; and the fourteenth part is the area from the thigh to the hip
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Do not extract matter from the great veins that are spread throughout the flesh, because this does not have the power to heal these wounds; neither should the scraping be done with fire in any disease that requires evacuation of the entire body.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessary, repeat the scraping at the beginning and at the end of the month, and in the middle of the month and at any other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in the men that are in the category of being able to be treated with scraping, there is an abundance of blood within that requires extraction by scraping and who has in the head a great swelling and great heat; and of those who have replecement and pus in their face and in their head and in their chest; and of those who have itching in their face and in their brow and darkness and weakness in their limbs; and of those who have their wound from the scraping; and of those who have their laughter multiplied; and of those who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue is clotted and vomiting blood; and of those who sleep multiplied, and of those who see blood in their sleep sweat or old blood or spots or other causes that remain with them
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, whenever in any of these cases, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, when it has passed two or three hours since the scraping was performed, it is ordered to repeat the scraping
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The support of the scraping of the nape is that when it is exposed to gravity in the head and to the liquid that is falling from the limbs; however, do not evacuate the entire body
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This scraping is for the wound of the scalp.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	He is not worthy to handle them who is suffering from complete frigidity or catarrh, for he gives rise to that great document.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Therefore it is not permissible for them to use those old women, and in the heads of whom there are diseases of the cold kind.</end_of_turn>
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More deserving of him are those who are continuing with him on his journey; therefore command the attendant to place his hand with a little pressure on the windward side of his heels, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Better is the blowing of the aleckhel than the phlebotomy of the veins of the groin and the bladder: and for this reason we give praise to asthma, and to constriction of the belly and scissura of the spasm of the belly, and cough, and distension.</end_of_turn>
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And we must command the blowing of the aleckhel to be slight, for if it is stopped, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.</end_of_turn>
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the blowing of the ambergdahan gives praise to headaches and ophthalmia, and diarrhea, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is better than phlebotomy of the spleen.</end_of_turn>
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And command the attendant not to put his hand too deep in scarification, for he will cause the artery to bleed and blood to flow freely.</end_of_turn
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the blowing of the heels will cause discomfort in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and a likeness to their diseases that are in the mouth, and is better than phlebotomy of the alimentary canal that is in the two lips.</end_of_turn
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Better is the blowing which is made on the two spatulas for catching, which is useful for filling with warmth.</end_of_turn>
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the blowing of the two heels from under the ribs gives joint help with the phlebotomy of three veins, that is of the bladder, groin and head, for those which follow will give blood to all the veins more numerous than those which are in the belly, and those smaller veins which are among the greater ones until the attraction reaches the three veins.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the attendant not to proceed too far in scarification, for his location is denuded of flesh, and leaves him nerves and arteries.</end_of_turn
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this is a blowing which is made over the cushions and gives praise to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers below the heels.</end_of_turn
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And we must command the attendant to make a great blowing, and that it be from afar, for his location does not digest a strong section; and strong blows are to be taken with slight scarification.</end_of_turn
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Better are the blows of the palms than a superficial manifestation, for they take away the blood of the whole body, and give praise to the old pains of the tonsils and the great vein, and the bladder; and cause the menstruation, and give praise to vomiting and diarrhea; and are better than phlebotomy of two superficial veins, and swelling, and two cavernous veins.</end_of_turn
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, do not neglect all the body and make them faint in many men.</end_of_turn>
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the blowing of vomiting is of great help with the blowing of the two palms.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the blows is that you pause the starting blow and subsequent blows until a temperate succus has taken place, and do not prolong the position of the blows, but rather pause them leisurely, and resume them cautiously, and that the humors reach the place immediately for advancement.</end_of_turn>
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease until you see the place already swell and expand and that the color of the blood appears.</end_of_turn
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you have finished your scarification, repeat the succus little by little, and consider in the condition of the body.</end_of_turn
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender flesh of rare pores, command that you make him a single scar and do not do it again, for his location is not to be ulcerated.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the attendant to enlarge the scarification and make a little wound, and hold the succus easily.</end_of_turn
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickness in the blood, then command that you make two incisions, for in the first incision the passage of the subtiliation to the blood and the moisture of it is opened.</end_of_turn
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second one the acquisition of the extraction of the thick blood.</end_of_turn>
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is not thick, then command that you make a third incision so that you can achieve the fourth degree.</end_of_turn
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the stone piece by piece or a small one, we should make an incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And finally, when we want to extract the stone piece by piece or a small one, we should make an incision. And if we know that the stone is large, we should make a larger incision.</end_of_turn>
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the extent of the incision is only as deep as the depth of the wound.</end_of_turn>
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the wound is large, hard, tough, and has severe itching, cover the edges of the wound with soft substances; in summer, thus with aloe oil or violet oil, or almond oil, or poppyseed oil; and in winter, thus with olive oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or mastic oil.</end_of_turn
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if there is a large, fleshy swelling, put on olive oil either bitter, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or pennyroyal oil, and so on.</end_of_turn
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	Moreover, if the patient has wide-ranging tender swelling, it is forbidden to apply oil, but rather to wash the area of the swelling with vinegar or cold water, or with rose water, or with chamomile water, or with wormwood water, and so on.</end_of_turn
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the stone is moist, wash the wound with vinegar or water of mint, sumac, and the like.</end_of_turn
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the swelling is large, wash the wound with strong vinegar or water of fennel, which is greater, or of elderberry, or of chamomile, and so on.</end_of_turn
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And keep the wound covered until the bath; because it must be administered immediately after the bath for an hour or two, and keep the wound covered.</end_of_turn
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done to return the blood from the phlebotomy before the incision?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the outset: if the patient is bilious and has acute pain and inflammation of the stone, it is necessary to prevent cold causes, such as vinegar and urine, and fat, lead, radish, and chamomile, and the like.</end_of_turn
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And suspend their food thus as poultry, lean meats, boiled vegetables with vinegar, and other bitter foods.</end_of_turn
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the patient is feverish, it is necessary to prevent the ingestion of vinegar, almond milk, or buttermilk of poppyseed, and fragrant herbs between meals; and it is recommended that they should drink little and eat sparingly, and abstain from poultry, meat, fish, eggs, and legumes.</end>
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And the drink should be greater than the food on the day of the incision and the phlebotomy.</end>
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary to remain in bed for several hours after breakfast, either with laxatives such as rhubarb or medicinal powders such as musk or alum, before or during the incision or phlebotomy, so that the main limbs are comforted and the stone is softened; and do not take enemas.</end_turn>
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	And the incisions that are made must be in the parts where the pain is, on the abdomen and ankle, on the navel, and in the groin, because these parts do not suffer from the incision.</end_turn
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for these except for the attraction of the stone from the limb, as when the wound opens up on a swelling of the limb caused by the flow of the stone from the stone of the nerves; and use this to dissolve the cold freeness of the limb, as when it opens up on the abdomen and the navel; because that will make the limb limp and cause the pain to disappear that resolves the freeness.</end_turn
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already mentioned when the stone comes out in its operation or by force, because by its attraction it brings together the soft parts of the wound and expels the pus from its place.</end_turn
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when it is mentioned above with regard to the abdomen and ankle, the freeness of the wound must be treated in those enclosed areas.</end_turn
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These incisions are administered without any other support, except for some herbs that are administered with fire.</end_turn><end_turn>
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some herbs are administered filled with cold water in the abdominal diseases.</end_turn
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the incision should be full and large, so it is only cold water or water in which the appropriate herbs have been boiled.</end_turn
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wind administered with fire: the breadth of the orifice of two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of resin is half of a palm; and be at the sides of it, in the area that is in the circumference, half of it, the thread be small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Whether of egg yolk or lemon, of orange marges, lion, walnuts and almonds for so that it does not damage the limb its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let the middle of it be a transverse scar of egg or iron, where a candle is held over the fire
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this wind is greater than the one we recommended; and the little more of that according to the ailments and the state of that one who uses it
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of the ancients are extended so that others are more than the winds of the young and of great stature.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of making this wind with fire over the limb is that you extend the flame with fire of wood conveniently giving a little candle of wax, and you place that over the middle of the transverse scar in the middle of the wind, so that the fire is kindled around the outside so that it does not burn the body of the patient.</start_of_turn>
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And so let it be paused over the limb of the patient, and the thumb be said about the thread that we have said, until when we have the winds and we do not indicate that they should stop and that it escapes the vapor over that thread, the hour the wind will be so much dissolved.</start_of_turn
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And thus ignite the flame according to its manner, and repeat that if you indicate that you have finished with that.</start_of_turn>
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the wind that is administered in the disease of gout, with water, in which there is no transverse scar or thread, and is not administered but is filled with water, and is placed over the limb only.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: The greater this wind is, the better, because it receives a great quantity of water.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xcvii.	End of text.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood does not administer in many members but in the limbs in which it is not possible to position winds, because of the smallness of those, thus as well as the thumb and little finger and similar; or in limb denuded of flesh, thus as well as the nose and lip and during similar.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that if you have found blood that is in the deep parts of the body.</start_of_turn
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And so let them be left lying down and at night in deep water until they are faint; and that no cause remain in the belly of those; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with a forceps and with winds; and let the limb of the patient be cooled down until it turns red; and let them be paused over it.</start_of_turn
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and the case is over.</start_of_turn
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to drain the cavity with the wind, it is better later in treatment.</start_of_turn
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, the hour lava the cavity with warm water and let some more water; and let it be wet and squeezed out.</start_of_turn
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the disease is prolonged along with the bleeding, and what remains is that, the hour you put in a sponge of lead in cold water, and pause that one from above until the secretion is opened.</start_of_turn
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the disease is multiplied, the hour you sprinkle over it powdered vitriol, or urine and similar to their pestilential causes, until the disease is evacuated; or that you pause over the area the greater masses of scraped honey, and that you leave them until the honey sticks to the area, and that is the disease evacuated.</start_of_turn
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the bleeding, when it is possible to change those.</start_of_turn
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the bleedings are prohibited of suspension, the hour let the area be wet with recent disease or leave a needle in the places until the disease goes away; and so let them be paused, because those when they feel any disease will be so much better.</start_of_turn
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, sprinkle over those a little of ground aloe, or salt, or ash, and cover them all.</start_of_turn
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus ends the third part: restoration.</start_of_turn
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very useful necessary in the art of medicine; and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation of the bones.</start_of_turn
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O, son, understand that doctors, vulgarians and those who at some time do not heed the elders or read those things, will scoff at this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is fitting that this madness of the learned in our land is private; and I have never forgotten it at any time in all my life; and I have not omitted it from this work, except for the length of reading the works of the elders and studying their understanding of them, until I had extracted the science from them.</end_of_turn>
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I add to this experiments and studies throughout my life.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and my experiments; for I have abridged this for you others and spared you the burden of lengthy explanations; and I have opened this matter in the end for brevity; and I have shown you in the end the way in which these symptoms are administered, as it is stated in addition to the declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.</end_of_turn
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.</end_of_turn>
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection of these fractures of bones, from which the previous preface is necessary before we begin the remembrance of fractured limbs and various other things about them.</end_of_turn
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore let us speak in this chapter of the sum total of the matter; and the chapters which follow are necessary for an understanding of the works of those artifices who are forced to stay close to the truth of these matters; for you and those who are commanded to know or learn this noble art from you.</end_of_turn
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Therefore I say that when an accident of fracture or dislocation or twist or similar case occurs, the hour immediately following calls for cold compresses or the application of oil, or whatever remedy you deem appropriate, even if it is the cause of the accident itself, or if it is an infant, or an old man, or a time of great heat, or great cold.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And we recommend in food both fresh herbs and boiled meats and crabs; and we forbid fatty meats and all foods that obstruct the veins of health, except when you are certain that the cautery will follow, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter from the limb.</end_of_turn
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And the hour returns the patient to their first position as is customary for them.</end_of_turn
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the fractured bone begins to be restored, the hour covers that the patient should not be given nourishing foods of great size and difficulty in which there is viscosity, such as broths made from barley with vinegar, broth of fish, brains, heads, feet, and calves, and fat from oxen, and eggs, and peas fresh, and large vegetables resembling those, and in this regimen is sufficient coagulation of the fracture more pleasantly and gently.</end_of_turn
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you must know that bones break in those who are in their first infirmity and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of the limbs.</end_of_turn
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the drying out of those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated until the end of their lives, just as the bones of small children.</end_of_turn
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Moreover nature is accustomed to adjust and forgets the fractured bone in every way that is similar to a knot in which the thickness that adheres and strengthens that which is together until it is joined together again, until the end of formation and rest, just as fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prevent it from doing its work.</end_of_turn
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to abstain from food for the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and bigness, as we have said.</end_of_turn
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many different fractures according to the diversity of the limb.</end_of_turn
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you must know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limb, for the fracture of the thigh bone is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the forearm bone is different from the fracture of the leg bone; and in the same way all the others are diverse among them.</end_of_turn
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will speak in each chapter of the memory of all the species of fracture, explained in a distinct chapter from the others.</end_of_turn
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many different fractures in general.</end_of_turn
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone in their entirety are diversified; for it is a useful fracture of the curved kind rather than that which occurs in the stars; and some fractures are useful according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the heel and ankle and wrist, which are caused both by violent blows and by natural causes, just as it is said in the proverb when one is preparing to write, and it is a fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is a slight fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in every case it is an evil or torment proper in restoring them according as will be remembered later on concerning the different things remembered in those same places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of fracture of the bone.</start_of_turn>
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this is known as a fracture of the bone: it is a twisting of the limb, and from that prominence and protrusion of the limb to the feeling, and only from this when I press on it with my hand.</start_of_turn
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent twisting of the limb or if it is not suspected, you must touch the bone and if the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.</start_of_turn
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There is also possible that it is a slight twisting or small fracture, in which case you must not touch that part with your hand or compress it; there must be a pause concerning the medicines from which you will remember later on at the appropriate moment; and then hold it strictly tight.</start_of_turn
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you must know that the limb when it is bent and is not split into two or something else that does not happen to it during life, when it is recovered in its entirety from the cause, the hour that covers that from the time you begin to rectify it has passed.</start_of_turn
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it happens again after the cautery, leave it for a few days until the pain has ceased; and then support it as you can by any means that you can manage to lift and hold up.</start_of_turn
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you must know that the restoration of the limb and its elevation is lighter than that of the bone in which the pain occurs during life.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And so remember what will come later.</start_of_turn
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	May be in the bone there are fractures, however, it is necessary to extend this limb broken in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.</start_of_turn
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And keep your position so that the limb is held in its natural position, while the broken parts are extended from the limb; thus you will find it easier to return those after the cautery and in any way you can in their places.</start_of_turn
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care that you do not cause further pain to the patient by your operation of the limb or injury; and perform it with the greatest care and skill that you can manage in order to join one bone to the other in a companionable way in many ways.</start_of_turn
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And take advantage at that moment of your touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is some other cause of this, rectify that and support that for the amount of your virtue.</start_of_turn
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, just as foolish doctors often do who perform the cautery for their operation, or who cause contraction in the limb just as we have seen in the performance of their operations.</start_of_turn
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And so add, equating and decent operation and stricture of that limb, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about that and make him believe that he should not feel that in the hours of his watch and sleep, and see his recovery and agitation, and do his egestion, and do all the movements throughout with all his might; and wait until the position of the limb is the one in which he is assured of pain relief, which is what happens when he is placed in the position of the painful limb or injury; for the hour that covers that is that you change that to another position in which he does not feel pain; and keep him in that position so that the limb does not suffer twisting when it is restored.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the stricture of the limb is that which I recommend; for you must know that broken limbs are diverse in their size and greatness and in their shape.</start_of_turn
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And as for those that are small such as the arm and the finger and the toe, the hour that covers them must be of soft material.</start_of_turn
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And as for those that are large such as the thigh or the chest, cover them with tough material that is firm, so that the strong ligament that connects the great part with the strong part is held firmly in place, without any damage.</start_of_turn
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And so begin, perform your evacuation of equipment, tie the convenient ligament in such a way as to reach the place of that fracture with three covers or four as the limb deserves; and hold the hand a little over the ligament.</start_of_turn
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And so look at the most elevated part of the place of the fracture, and hold it more strongly than the stricture with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture.</start_of_turn
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then draw out a little of the swelling around the fracture site, and gradually soften the stiffness, until you can grasp a large part of the limb.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and wrap it around the wound surrounding the fracture, and also wrap the bandages further down from the fracture site. The operation should be performed on the stiffness of the bandage and in the softening of that which we said before about the first bandage.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then rest between the folds of the loin or abdomen where there is the bending of the fracture, if there is bending of the fracture; but if not, do not rest in it for any reason.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then rest on the other bandage, and tightly bind over these bandages as much as necessary, if there is no swelling or pus in the limb; and if there is swelling or pus, leave that for a while; and when the swelling has subsided, strengthen the bandage.</end_of_turn>
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the layers of the bandage be of such size as to reach the knee; and be formed skillfully; or of felt or palm leaves; or of any other suitable material. And let the width of each layer be according to this form and figure.</end_of_turn
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the layer that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and wider than the other layers. And the length of the layer should be such as is suitable for the limb in magnitude and proportion; and strengthen over the layers with another bandage according to your first stricture; and tie securely as before according to what has been said of stricture, for it is the stricture of the fracture itself that is most important, and as much as the fracture is prolonged, the stricter the stricture should be.</end_of_turn>
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be finer in thickness and flexibility, and be of silk. If the threads are thick, thus have I seen in the operation of many fools who have bound them during the fracture, and that is a great error, when they loosen the stricture before the fracture is equal.</end_of_turn
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And subtle threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve stricture with them as with those that you wish. And do not allow that there be less than a finger's width between the layers.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is such that the edges of the fracture are near the stricture in those places, then rest them until no further damage is done.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some wounds of fracture are like a wound with pus, and an accident of disruption in the bone, and I recall in that book according to singularity.</end_of_turn
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that a broken limb is not immediately straightened with the bandages on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is great, it does not suffice to rest it on the bandages for a few days or even a few weeks, according to your security of the risk of pus.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way in which the ancients restored the plaster with which they bound fractures, dislocations and twists.</end_of_turn
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	A plastering manner like that of healing a fracture, convenient for many complex and majorly for women and men, for which it is of those about which no heat or cold falls: and take powder of chaff, which is the pith of wheat that is left over from threshing.</end_of_turn
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And be cautious lest it be as thick as an egg white, and do not make it too fine; and use this cautiously.</end_of_turn
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of dressing for fractures, dislocations and sprains: recipe of asphalt, lapdanum, acacia, enula and marigold, which is ground from a thousand grains of mastic gum, five grains of mirra and aloes, and two grains of aloes. Mix these together with water or with egg white if the patient's wound is raw; and use this dressing, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones pleasantly, and confirms to the majority of men.</end_of_turn
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of dressing for fractures and sprains: recipe of marigold and white alum, five grains of mirra and aloes, six grains of acacia and two grains of chamomile.</end_of_turn
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All things are ground together in a mortar with a rough stone, and they are pounded, and they are consumed with water or with vinegar and oil, and it is administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering joints and bones separated from each other at these locations, and when pain occurs in these and in fissures and fractures: take soft lanolin and submerge it in strong wine and oil cooked and put it on the area
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	May this plaster not be for restoration, but for the expulsion of pain properly
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores the fracture: take ashes of figs and ashes of poppy seed; mix them together and make plaster of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of plastering abbreviated for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining swelling: take root of violet, chamomile and violets, barley flour, all of which go together; They are all ground together and consumed with wine, if the limb is not scorched
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scorched, then consume it with lukewarm water of columb or with water and oil from it
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering more solid in resolution than the first, when the swelling is hard, must be restored for the limb: take root of violet and linseed, barley, beeswax, marjoram, violets, chamomile, all of which go together; all of them are ground together and consumed with vinegar or water or wine, as desired according to the quality of the limb and the degree of its swelling
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Hippocrates does not say that it should be left free that it is placed over the fractured limb until its restoration is completed, but rather that some kind of fat and oil should be added; and I recommend that you rather keep it between thickness and thinness
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	I do not know what Gualia is, but it is seen that it is placed over the fractured limb until its restoration is completed, and the causes in which it is excessive cold or heat are like those that we have recommended
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plastering that relieves injury and pain: take millet, celery, bruised bones of the house unscathed or poppy seeds, violets, salt, pounded together; they are ground together and pounded and consumed, and make plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity according to which it should be covered should remain so that the ligature is not too tight, for if it is too tight there is pain neither swelling nor is the bone fractured it is not good for its location. The hour you do not remove it for a few days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain occurs violently or swelling or inflammation, the hour you should cover it up or remove it in that hour, and leave the plaster on it
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take sponge of linen and marine sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse that in lukewarm water, and with that wash the limb until the swelling and pain are gone; and then put on clean linen and cover the limb with lanolin soaked in strong wine and oil or olive oil, and bind over it for a night until you are sure that the swelling has gone down, and that the limb is relaxed, and that the pain has disappeared.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And repeat that tightening slightly and small plaster and do not tighten it excessively for your first constriction, and lower it when that is done until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the swelling and the redness and the pain and the inflammation and all these things have already gone away, and digestion of plaster and of constriction is required, the hour you repeat that just as you have begun to make it whole again
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause has occurred to the limb of which we have spoken, the hour you should not remove it until three or four or five or seven days have passed and some people keep it for xx days as they please for the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture has healed, and when the coagulacion of the marrow over that has occurred.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjust in the tightening more than in your first tightening throughout, and adjust in the nourishment of the patient's food, as it is preceded by the recollection of that.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More often the limb of the fracture has dried out and become extended more than when it is covered, however you must know that food is prohibited to go to that; and therefore take that with lukewarm water that you must drink every day; and do it for three days; and loosen the tightening a little, and for this operation restore nourishment to the limb, and it will heal pleasantly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When more than the fools of the doctors restore a fractured limb that has not been restored from the beginning, following the custom, and it is restored carelessly, it is an error according to their operation, and fear is great, and if they were more skilled, they would make the Ancients greater when they are free and would cause them no further harm in doing so.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have never seen any of them who do this, for it is more reasonable that they do not do it.</end_of_turn>
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter: On fractures when they occur in the head.</end_of_turn>
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are multiple, and the figures are diverse, and the causes are diverse, for some fractures are caused by the percussion of space, and the percussion hinders all the bone within the cavity, which is left behind with the fracture itself, just as it happens in the wrist; and for this reason this species is called buckle fracture; or the space penetrates each part of the bone, and penetrates the marrow but does not pass through the back of the bone; and this species of fracture is called complete fracture.</end_of_turn
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the swelling of these two fractures is great or little, and of a fracture that is contracted or retracted; and the cause of this is the percussion with blunt or sharp objects, and it persists.</end_of_turn
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which already approaches the nerve that is left behind the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the swelling of these two fractures is great or little.</end_of_turn
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the fracture is that which is hidden in the bone, in the substance of the small vessel, and for this reason this species of fracture is called capillary fracture.</end_of_turn
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And the fracture is caused by blunt or sharp objects or percussion of stone, and it persists, which makes any layer of the bone penetrate the parts surrounding it, and it is fatal in the hollow part just as it happens in the bones of the forearm when it is percussioned and a part of it is introduced into the surrounding parts.</end_of_turn
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And more commonly it is caused by the bones of humid substances, as well as their heads.</end_of_turn
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus with all these species of fractures that we have mentioned, they are like pieces of glass separated.</end_of_turn
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I find it remarkable about all this.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these species of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and in the presence of corrupted bone that is over them.</end_of_turn
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The capillary fracture is known by this that it is discovered on the bone, and it is excised, and is limited by an attempt, for the fracture appears black.</end_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Moreover, in the treatment of fractures, attention should be paid at the beginning to the signs of the disease, and when sometimes for the signs that indicate severity, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, syncope, and acute fever, and if any of these symptoms persist, it is not healthy.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And when sometimes accidental occurrences do not happen, you hope for health, and when you begin the treatment of them.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of which is that if it is provoked at the beginning like the plague and what is in the winter days, it is necessary that you study in the bone marrow on the fourteenth day according to all custom.</end_of_turn
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, it is necessary that you cover the bone marrow for seven days, having observed that what is left behind the bone is corrupted by the nerve, and that these symptoms have occurred.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the nerve covering the cerebellum, and is divided into small pieces and retracted, it is necessary that you insert the divided part with an instrument, as I recommend to you.</end_of_turn
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you take the head of the disease that is plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and manage as you can according to the figure of the plague, and that you are curious about the disease.</end_of_turn
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you, you must oppose the detection of the bone, flux of blood of cautery, for what you can, and that you cover it with oil and vinegar cloths, and make the plague rest until the swelling subsides; and be sure to drain the blood; and begin to circle the bone and to ablate it.</end_of_turn
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to two methods of operation.</end_of_turn
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E la una manieyra es que tu inscribes le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And thus you inscribe the bones with a straight cut, and this is the way to do it: And then you administer another incision, a little wider than the former; and this is the way to do it.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And know that you must name several incisions, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are longer than others and lie at the back of the parts, and they are of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion over the incisions so that you do not break the head and leave that one behind.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must pierce in the circumference of it giving that you administer the incisions at the edges, which are called superficial incisions
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus except when those do not stop the end of the bone at the place where it should stop, for the superficial incision is a rounded end or margin over that which remains the head of the bone like a margin or a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing the spiciness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these superficial incisions, which are convenient for the spiciness of each bone, as much as in all tests of the cervical part of the limb which is acute, the quantity in length and breadth being according to the quantity of spiciness of this test
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of incisions: The quality of perforating in the circumference of the fractured bone is that you stop the incision on the bone and rotate that with the thumbs until you see that the bone has already been pierced; and then change the incision to another place, and stop when there is between all the amount of the thickness of the ray or around it
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And thus you inscribe with the incisions that which is between each hole of the bone, and make that one more subtle than you could over that in the end of levitating, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause for some disturbance which occurs to it, as nails and fine forceps
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And know that you must take great care that the incision does not touch any cause of infection.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And therefore when you have pierced the bone around the infection, and if it is continued with it, extract it, for you must scrape and burn away that which is in the roughness of it like an incision, more especially since the other incisions are more taut and subtle.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there remain any small parts of the bones and fragments, then take those away with ease with that which is due to you from the disturbances; and thus care for the wound with liniment and ointment as we have said
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another manner of operating is light, long, which says dissect Gaul and split for a great wound; and this is the saying of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most vehement and most apparent, until when you have uncovered that part and you have stopped leaving that limb of that incision slowly and calmly as we have said.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the blunt part is round and does not touch any cause, and the acute part is of it in two broad parts forward and backward, as sometimes; that the blunt part be adjusted to the infection with the face of the acute incision on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And thus you pierce over the incisions with a little hammer until you have pierced all the bone with ease as if it were rotated, and you must be sure of the safety that it does not happen by chance in any manner, and if the physician was the most learned of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there remains any accessory cause attached to the bone in any place of the bone, pierce that one with the extremity of the incision that is blunt, and deliver that one with ease, for it is delivered from it spontaneously and without pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the cavity, and that which is broken off or remains of the bone is the face of it, and remains in the roughness and subtleties, then know that you must scrape that roughness and extirpate those subtleties cautiously with reasons worthy of it for the number of which you have prepared, of various quantities so that you can manage to administer them in all places with the greatest convenience and the greatest safety according to what you have lost in your operation that broken bone and its shape
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And know that you must administer with your reason at the beginning of those reasons the most obtuse of those reasons, and thus use a little of the former and do not cease until you have reached the greatest tenacity and the greatest subtlety of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May in any of the other minor fractures or superficial fracture, cover that you administer care according to what you have lost in order to rectify them.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because it is not known about all of those things that have been studied in that art
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this is what we have shown in great fractures
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the swelling is rectangular when you extract the bone, then cover that you take hold of it according to the quantity of the wound, and immerse it in olive oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another bandage doubled or tripled and immerse it in wine and olive oil and place it over the first bandage, and do to the pus that it comes out willingly from that place, that it does not cause him to suffer; and then administer over that ligament fat, and do not tighten that except for the quantity that has the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that like this for a day or two until you are sure that the wound has healed; and then remove that and administer medicines that are useful for drying up, such as rue seeds and oatmeal, and powdered alum and herbs, and like those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you grind these medicines into powder that is scattered over the wound; and in general, administer all medicines of proper action that you deem to be astringent and not corrosive.</start_of_turn>
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful in your art that the wound in your care is neither too dry nor too wet; neither let it become contaminated with any other thing; for when it is adjusted over the bone of the head, it corrupts that and weakens it, and causes the patient to suffer greatly.</start_of_turn>
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And take care in the suffering of the patient, as when it is modified the bone and more when the care of it is diminished, and is black on the surface; and therefore consider that when it comes to the patient the accidents that we have said, knowing that it is pernicious for him to do so in every way.</start_of_turn
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackening appears except for the medicine that is left out, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackening, then cover that you take a little more of the medicine and a little olive oil three times. and with those stripes a bandage, and place that over the suffering; and then care for that according to the species of treatment that you deem to be appropriate until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.</start_of_turn
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not fractured but rather that two parts have become displaced, or one of those has been somewhat softened, so that in it you have two bones, for the displaced part is cartilaginous and is not fractured and does not suffer except for swelling and pain and sleeplessness.</start_of_turn
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	When one of the two parts is fractured, then cover that you insert little by little in the ditch of the nose, and that you unite that fracture with the tie that indicates it, and with the poultice, until the nose returns to its natural shape.</start_of_turn
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And be useful for you in this, and keep that you do not cause excessive pain for the patient during that operation.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and you say that it is not for this, then cover that it be equal at the end of the ray in which it is small.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do like that.</start_of_turn
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Cover that you restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then leave it for a while or two until you deem it to be healed.</start_of_turn
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And put into the extremity of the nose a wick of lint if the fracture is in one part, or two cushions if the fracture is in two parts, and be of such size that it fills the hole of the nose.</start_of_turn
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And tell the old restorers that the cushions should be bound around the edges, and should be changed throughout the day, although it is not seen by me; for I have covered that the wick should be immersed in albumin with oil of poppy seed; and like that keep the wound closed until the bone is firm and the cartilage is solidified.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some put sponges into the nose instead of a cushion, because it is better for increasing the pus that is enveloped in lint; and that the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.</start_of_turn
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not urgent; if you wish, make an incision, or if you wish, make a calamus.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If another wound appears after the cautery, apply pressure to the area with the thumb or with the heel immersed in vinegar and olive oil, or with diachronicum.</end_of_turn>
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If the wound does not reappear, however, cover it with flour of the size of barley and fine powder of hen feathers with egg white; and place your hand over it to stop the bleeding, and do not touch it for any reason.</end_of_turn>
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the limb are fractured slightly or broken, cover the wound and extract the fragments with instruments suitable for each; then close the wound, and care for the area where the fracture occurred and consolidate it, and apply appropriate dressings.</end_of_turn
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If there is a wound of the flesh in the limb, cover the wound with a calamus and administer lead needles until it is completely healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .iiii.	End of text.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Treatment for a fractured jawbone.</start_of_turn>
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is fractured and the fracture is not associated with a wound, it is necessary to assess if the fracture is displaced only, and not fractured into two and bent outwards. In this case, the patient's pain is usually slight.</start_of_turn
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left side, insert the index finger of the right hand; and hold the fracture with your other hand on the opposite side of the limb from the affected area, so that the bone is supported equally on both sides.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone is already fractured into two, administer extension of the two parts according to the rectitude until it is possible to achieve balance.</start_of_turn
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If teeth are loosened due to the fracture, strengthen those that you hope will remain intact with gold or silver or ivory; and place your hand over the fractured jaw and hold the duplicate tissue, and place your hand over the great nerve appropriately, or a pad equal in length to the jaw; and tie the dressing according to what is appropriate for the patient and convenient for the application.</start_of_turn
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the patient to rest and remain calm, and refrain from eating any sour foods.</start_of_turn
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you observe that the shape has already been altered in some way, cover the area and remove it on the third day; and then correct what has already been altered and cover the area with powder of mallow, egg white or barley flour, as it has already been said, and keep your hand over the dressing.</start_of_turn
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when the limb is fixed and the adjustment of the bone is complete, leave it as it is, without removing the dressing, until the fracture is healed; for if you remove the dressing too soon, the fracture will become stretched in three parts.</start_of_turn
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another wound appears after the cautery, administer what has been said about the care of the wound until it is healed, and remove the wound.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is associated with a wound, consider whether it is a detached piece of the bone or a displacement, and in the latter case, you are advised to remove the displacement along with the pain.</start_of_turn
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the wound opening is wide, enlarge the opening with the flebotome according to the amount of the necessary expansion.</start_of_turn
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished removing the displacement, and of those you do not remove, close the wound if it is wide; otherwise, keep your hand over the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .v.	End of treatise.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Treatment for a fractured collarbone.</start_of_turn
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A fracture of the collarbone usually occurs from the front side of the bone, below the muscle, and this fracture can be classified into three types.</start_of_turn
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Whether the fracture is complete or incomplete, or whether there is a displacement without associated fracture; the recovery of the fracture is desired; or if there is displacement of the fragments, restoration is difficult; or if the fracture is associated with a wound.</start_of_turn
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In such a case, when the fracture is associated with a wound, two assistants are necessary, one to hold the fractured area and the other to extend the collarbone on the opposite side.</start_of_turn
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And thus embrace the fracture at the thighs until it is formed in the right way, and do not leave it protruding too little or too much.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you extend it more than necessary, then stop and let the patient feel the pain, and let the size of the wound be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the fracture and cover the wound with your hand until you have embraced the fracture as it should be embraced.</end_of_turn>
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you are unable to draw out the limb from the socket, so that it is protruded, then stop and let the patient rest their chin on their chest, and place a cushion under their muscle of the limb.</end_of_turn>
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistants support the limb under the muscle of the limb until the bone of the fracture is elevated above the socket, and when you have rectified the fracture, embrace that which is at the thighs.</end_of_turn>
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Even if you feel stiffness of the fracture and pain, stop and put your hand over that and extract those stiffness with ease.</end_of_turn>
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, stop and make an incision of the limb with one of the instruments which you have prepared for this purpose, because you had paused leaving the fracture without support; and this is the form of the wound:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	Like a wound of the kind which has this concavity; and let the width of it be according to what you need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the scarcity of it.</end_of_turn
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And the length of it should be as much as is possible for the operation; that there be two limbs like this at times, one limb wide and the other narrow.</end_of_turn
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the membrane which you have incised when you have extracted the stiffness from the bone is wide, and you are sure of the apposition of the cautery, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.</end_of_turn
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear the apposition of the cautery, then you close the wound with gauze and powder according to the quantity of the wound.</end_of_turn
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if there is an apposition of the cautery, stop and put on oil of rosemary and wine, and cover it.</end_of_turn
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And when the bone is rigid when the wound is closed and the section is completed, then place a plaster cast made of wheat flour and egg white, and place a sponge under the limb, and keep the patient still, if you have to, and take up a little moisture, so that the bandage which I hold in my hand has a length of three fingers and is as wide as three fingers; and put double powder over the sponge and the plaster; and take up a splint of the thumb and index finger of the same hand, and wrap it around the limb so that the thumb and index finger of the patient are supported, and reduce the plaster so that the rigidity of the fracture matches the rigidity of the limb, and do not leave anything occultated about this.</end_of_turn>
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And finally, do not neglect to see the patient every day, because when the ligament is softened or when the splint has become softened, then you must rectify this and strengthen the bandage.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And keep the patient from moving around too much, and let them sleep with their limb slightly elevated; so that at this height the attendants are at ease, and the fracture of the thigh is elevated to the height of the muscle; or that the arm is bound to the limb at the height of this.</end_of_turn
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage if there is no sign of progress or if there is an apostema, up to twelve days.</end_of_turn>
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the limb to that, and restore it in the rigidity and restore it when the fracture of the thigh is restored and the blood clotting has taken place.</end_of_turn
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And is strong and comfortable according to the month in xxviii days, and some walks in a house is useful in the month of that.</end_of_turn
Capitol .vi.	The treatment is finished.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Restoration of the fracture of the thigh.</end_of_turn>
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken at the lateral edge of the limb and is not fractured in the middle of it.</end_of_turn
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is fractured in the middle of the limb — and it is fractured in the middle of the limb — and is not recognized except by touch, then according as the shape of the fracture forces you to prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every way that is possible for you.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And so they stop the powder of mallow with an egg white; and they stop the powder of alum with a double spatula; and they stop over the surface with a sponge as much as the spatula whole or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the sponge remains concave in some parts of the area, then you should overlap that concave area with the egg white, and then place the sponge equally.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then remove the bowels with a long instrument with a tight constriction downwards and with a firm grip of the sponge so that it does not slip from the place.</start_of_turn>
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament in each day; and whenever it is softened, tie another bandage and hold it firm so that the sponge does not slip from the place.</start_of_turn
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And I hold the patient over the latrine seat.</start_of_turn>
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the sponge is restored in xx days or in .xxv.</start_of_turn
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And thus when the number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you know with certainty that what was from the bones from which you began is not to be feared or dissolved.</start_of_turn
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the foot bone and leave the tendo, then you should split over it, and keep it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the scapula of the heel after the cautery if it happens here.</start_of_turn
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.</start_of_turn
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The bones of the foot which are fractured in the middle of the limb and those which are at the end must be broken off; but the extremities of the limb must be kept firm that they may cicatrize and diminish.</start_of_turn
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And as for the accidents of the limb when the middle is fractured, it is that it inclines to the adjacent parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, and vomiting; and all these things are declared in the cavity of the fractured bone and are not hidden from the sense.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of the limb is that you rest the patient on the two buttocks, and place between the buttocks of the limb a cushion; and you press on the muscles of the limb, and adjust the ribs of the limb to the greatest of two ribs, and hold them in the operation of the limb and in the equilibrium according to all the manner that is possible and that is convenient, until you restore the shape of the bone as it was before.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And so you stop over the plaster and stop and stop over the dressing of the sponge or bandage of gauze or linen and keep them suspended in the air; and you cover that with a dressing; and you bind that over the fractured bone so that it is not painful; and you stretch that according to the swelling of each bruise, and hold that tightly; and consider the dressing at all times, and when it is softened stretch that.</start_of_turn
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary you cause to drain of that you must correct the swelling or bruising, or pain, or swelling that occurs in the limb, then you should uncover and remove that and remove the plaster and correct what has happened in the way of care; and so reduce the plaster, sometimes up to the face; and adjust the stretch so that it is healthy.</start_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.</start_of_turn
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You must know that the fracture of the ribs does not take place but in the thick parts that follow two; and as for the extremities of the parts from the front they do not cause anything except for what is cartilaginous.</start_of_turn
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you must know that it is not hidden from the sense; you must inquire about it from the patient.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration must be such that it embraces the fracture as we have said according to the possibility, except that it be embraced as it is enough; and so you plaster and strengthen the fractured bone with a sponge, if you think it is necessary of that.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining to the adjacent parts, then it causes the patient severe pain and puncture, just as if it were a puncture that happens to the one that has pleuracy; and for that the bone puts on the membrane; and it causes difficulty in swallowing, and vomiting and almost no cure; and this is difficult to cure.</start_of_turn
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients were ingenious in that manner.</start_of_turn
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And thus they say: cover that you take away the food of the patient which produces swelling and wind, so that the belly be flat and extended, and the fracture be fixed to the parts outside.</start_of_turn
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And say some of them that it should be stopped from the wind and that it should be covered; and it is like reasoning, but indeed it is feared that the wind will tear the excess from the area because of the weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And say some of them: cover the area with wool that is already immersed in burnt oil, and put powder between the ribs until it is full, that the ligature be firm when I encircle it around that according to custom; and indeed let it be treated with care with food and medicine
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent constriction of the patient who does not suffer from it, and if you give it a violent puncture with a pointed needle, remember about the patient, for when you cover the area, uncover the fractured rib, and indeed place your hand over that instrument that maintains the guts, the memory of which precedes it, and that it is necessary to loosen them, and extract what is inside.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And indeed let us adjust the two lips of the plague, if it is great, with boiling, and care for that with plaster until it is healed
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an accident of bleeding occurs, then your cushion and soak up powder in burnt oil and place over the area, and care for the patient with that which covers the bleeding.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And rest on the side on which you sleep, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	End of document.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the thigh and of the pelvis.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some veins can be bled from the bones of the pelvis, and their cautery must be applied, and it is similar to the vertebra of the thigh.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when it happens to some of them and you wish to know if it is healed or not, consider that sometimes the veins are already softened and stupefied and dead, and you cannot make them swell or extend or straighten them out without causing them to bleed, and when you tighten them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not cause pain, you must know that it is not healed, and in these circumstances it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you do that and feel in that tightening with your fingers or puncture them, you must know that the bone marrow is saved and that the patient will recover with care
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the pelvis like this and you wish to know if it is healed or not, consider the weight of them
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Sometimes when they are softened, accidents happen in the most violent, and indeed when you touch them about the two thighs, there is windiness and vomiting is its will, and many veins are supinated over the two thighs and cannot urinate, and you must know that it is deadly, and do not work in the care of them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If it does not happen that any cause of these is found, the cause is better and less severe
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The care for them is that you perforate the sensation of the bleeding with the pointed cautery which is placed over the fractured vertebra covered with burnt oil, or with balls of wool soaked in vinegar; place over that anything that any veins give within that the bleeding stops.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And indeed let us remove one of the comforting and existing plasters, and tighten over that which is ligature; and command the patient to rest and be tranquil and not to sleep on the side where he experiences pain until he is healed
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if an accident occurs that requires the removal of the sacrum or any cause that is already separated from it, then cover that area and hold that bone; and indeed adjust the two lips of the plague, with suture if it is great; and indeed care for that which is at the root of the disease, until it is healed
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the heel bone is fractured, and it is the end of the limb, then cover that area and place your left hand on the heel and grasp the fractured bone with your right hand as much as possible; and indeed place over that bandage and plaster, if you wish, and indeed tighten that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel the sacrum fractured in it, then take your foot off that area and hold that, and care for the plague with the care that precedes until it is healed
Capitol .x.	End of Document.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Restoration of the limb.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the limb have been fractured, and if they break, the fracture of them is only a communication in the extremities of these and is inscribed in the length and declines to the inward; and it happens that the patient feels pain in the area and punctures, and the limb is stunned when it is fractured
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of the limb is that you extend your hand over that which is over the fracture that is the figure of the limb.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is at the extremity of the limb alone, then you embrace that part as much as is appropriate according to the equation until it is assembled to its natural figure.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	May be if the fracture is in the bone or that it has already declined to the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on his belly until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture.</end_of_turn>
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And therefore when you have embraced that, pause over the bandage, and then pause over that splinter of bone or marrow, and strengthen by stricture over which you do not fear puncture of the fracture or removal of the splinter.</end_of_turn
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Embrace the concavity with that which is over that which that supports the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie down on his side or to rest on his side with his chest out.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May be if after this cautery occurs, then you cease the extension of the limb and its restoration until the cautery has subsided, and pause over it until that which is preceding is completed; and then return to the restoration of the limb, and strengthen that thus.</end_of_turn
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the heel bone or they are comminuted, then you treat them.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xi.	The treatise ends here.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Restoration of the fracture of the adjunct.</end_of_turn
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjunct is that which is between the groin to the head of the femur.</end_of_turn>
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, the restoration of it is in two ways, of which one is that you grasp the fractured bone with a handle of coarse sand according to this fashion:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And join to it in two extremities two ligaments, and then suspend it from the elevated place.</end_of_turn
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a chair; and then put the fractured limb outside over the bone until it reaches the middle part from which the curvature of the bone is annexed.</end_of_turn
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if there is any other serious cause, or the limb extends to the lower parts; and then the physician should hold the fracture firmly in the upper parts until the fracture returns as it should.</end_of_turn
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be supine on the cervical spine and suspend the limb of the collarbone with a ligament; and command two assistants one to hold what is below the fracture on his hands; and the other to hold the lower parts of it; and each one extend to his part.</end_of_turn
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with the ligament and over that with the other ligament, and each one of the assistants extend two of their parts.</end_of_turn
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then cover that half of the ligament over the trochanter and the other half leave the fracture outside the groin.</end>
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly if the fracture is near the groin, then cover that ligament over that place and over that groin.</end_of_turn
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Embrace that which facilitates and makes it easier, and when it is embraced as it should be according to that which covers and is applied well, then strengthen that which if not after cautery.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	May be if after this cautery occurs, then leave the stricture for seven days, and pause over it like a bandage of wool and oil until the cautery has subsided, and then strengthen that again.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen that is to pause the bandage over the fracture, and then pause the wrapping of coarse cloth over the bandage; and then adjust the arm over that adjunct, and put your hand open over the muscle.</end_of_turn
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And pause the muscle and strengthen over the adjunct the arms so that the arm is in place without hindering anything that may cause the fractured bone.</end_of_turn
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use crutches.</end_of_turn
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that which pauses over the fracture that staff is more rigid and more strong than the others; and pause between each staff the width of a finger, and the length of the staff according to the fracture along with three fingers from the whole part.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And strengthen over the staff at the stricture which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.</end_of_turn
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The stricture around the fracture site should be as tight as possible.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When the fracture is longer, the stricture should be smaller
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Therefore, if sometimes the position of the bones and the stricture are as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its normal position, then you will do well
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear swelling from the cautery, then leave the stricture and the bones inside for seven days as we have said before
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed in the place of the fracture; or it is prohibited to eat to prevent the limb from suffering from excessive stricture; and therefore rectify all this as we have said before.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May it be that you are confident that no harmful cause will occur, however, do not remove the ligature until at least three days have passed
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient rest quietly on the bed, and their limbs above their stomach
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause about the attendants who are carrying the cooked food, and consider at every hour of the night or day that it should not be swollen or dissolved the figure of the fractured limb, or that the ligament should not be softened, therefore rectify all this with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And abstain from eating for the patient according to the order that we have given before, even if the food is soft at the beginning until it has been chewed; and cover that the patient does not vomit
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the custom of the attendants and the change of position, it is that they should be strengthened for forty days; and cover that they are unfastened and that baths are administered and that medicine is given with which these things rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is delayed, then do not remove the ligature from that limb until a day or two months have passed.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two heads; of which one is small, and that is the one which is called the shoulder, and the other is great and that is the one which is supported from behind the little finger, from the part below the shoulder
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it is strong that only the great head is fractured, or only the small, or that both are fractured together
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the little head is fractured, the restoration of the limb is lighter, and the healing is easier
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the great head is fractured behind the shoulder the fracture is bad, and the healing is difficult
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worse of all is when both bones are fractured together
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the little head displaced, it is convenient for the doctor to suspend the restoration of the limb, that is, to leave it in slight extension until it is healed
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the great head is fractured, then cover that you suspend extension even more violently
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured together, then cover that you suspend the extraction even more strongly
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And cover that you support the limb so that the restoration of the limb and the extension of the limb is extended over a cushion, and that the palm of the hand is below the other fingers, more than all the others say, and that the thumb is lower than the others, and the patient is sitting on a cushion.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion under the limb in front or behind, so that the patient does not strain himself
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let the ministers extend the limb from the part below the shoulder towards the shoulder with the sleeve of the arm or with the ligament, and another minister extend the same in a similar way
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor must heal the bone until it returns to its normal position according to the best figure that can be made
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is a displacement of the bone, then you must reduce the whole limb in its place with your skill
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate displacement that you do not hope to restore, then you must leave it as it is according to our teaching from the beginning
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	And if the fracture is in the palm, and I have already said enough about this matter, then take care of that
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if swelling from the cautery should happen at the beginning of your restoration, then you line up a sponge with some rose oil and white wax, and put half between moisture and dryness, and strengthen the sponge over that which is under tension until the swelling subsides; and you remain the sponge and pause the plaster prepared from powdered millet with clay from the heel, and hold the bones; and make the bone which is fractured more rigid and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The stars of the arm are seen in great abundance, or a fracture in one or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then tighten the bandage firmly over the fracture site and when more is required, loosen the bandage from the parts above the fracture or from the parts below, tighten the bandage a little less as a reminder of what was done at the beginning of the chapter
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that cover the fracture are soft and moist, not rough or dry, and the thread with which it is bound should be neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have recommended.</start_of_turn>
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and its ligament for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which rectification is necessary, do the same as if it had happened to the limb, and until the pain has gone away.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Keep the limb still until it has recovered, and then tighten the bandage again.</start_of_turn>
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the swelling has already subsided and the bone is already healed and appears as before, then rectify everything with your skill.</start_of_turn>
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider also if the nourishment is forbidden from reaching the limb because of excessive tightening, because you should soften that a little and leave it for a few days until the pain has gone away, and then strengthen it.</start_of_turn
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If no other cause of these has occurred to the patient, do not remove the bandage for about xx days or so.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And suspend the patient's hand for its violent movement, and make them sleep on two cushions.</start_of_turn
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is healed in xxx days or in xxxii days, or the bone is healed in xxviii days, and all this according to the complexity of the case and the skill of the practitioner.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and the fingers.</start_of_turn
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that at the thumb and the tips of the fingers there is a fracture, and that it does not occur except with soft tissue tears.</start_of_turn
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or there is a tear, you must make the patient continue to fall and bend it lightly as before, and place your hand over that which is extended.</start_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor unites them until they are congruent with good union.</start_of_turn
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And you must keep the plaster still and quiet, if not, you will cause further damage; and tighten the bandage according to the amount of the area, and you have already covered that with wool.</start_of_turn
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is at the base of the palm, you must support the palm of the hand, and command the patient to strengthen that which has been fractured; strengthen it both with the palm and with the long bone.</start_of_turn
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the bone which is floating on the wool should be applied to the palm; and strengthen that as much as you can.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the outside of the hand, you must remove the bandage from the outside of the hand and from the inside of the palm, so that the hand can be opened and closed; and tighten the bandage, as if the hand were rotated between the fingers with the ligaments.</start_of_turn
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If there is a fracture in one of the fingers, if it is said to be delicate, it must be united as it is convenient and strengthen it with the palm and if you wish, place a small support to elevate the fracture and prevent it from being crushed.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, just as in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the ring, or in the little finger, you must unite them as a whole and bind them with the finger that is next to the one which has the fracture; or you can bind them all together as a continuous line, which is better; or you can place a small support over that finger, as we said before.</start_of_turn
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your restoration, and do so, the custom of postoperative treatment and the contrary — with the surgical operation — with what is done when any cause of these has occurred, as is repeated in the narration.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is violently fractured and is said to be converted into gangrene and yellow pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration is done by stretching the ligament over the fracture and another ligament is left to support the fracture. The patient is placed prone on the abdomen and on the face
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligament according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Even if it is close to the hip, then the ligament is properly stretched at the fifth space, so that the extension is done without risk, and the other ligament leaves the fracture
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is close to the hip, then do the same with the ligament at the hip, and make the extension outwards
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor grasps the bone from both sides and reduces that which is necessary according to the natural conformation; the bone is joined by a good connection. The hand must be covered with a dressing and a bandage must be applied without delay to the limb that has been injured
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	And if there is an accident in the limb, then leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides, and then return to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be placed as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, bend the limb two or three times, and remove the excess; and then cover the wound so that it reaches the knee and the hip
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And keep long thread firmly between the hip and the limb towards the toes, and pass the ends of the thread from the upper part of the wound to the lower parts, and then twist over the wound and the hip as much as the excess of the bandage
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then rest on the hip in the place of that fracture, and put a bandage on the limb of the bone of the wound.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the bleeding is stopped
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then make a firm bandage from the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four covers, and when you have advanced from the middle of the fracture, your bandage will be less tight and lighter and softer
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend the two ends of the thread to the toes until it reaches the ankle, and tighten both ends of the threads at the other side so that the ligament is not strained in the middle
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And keep the bandage on for a while, until there is no longer any risk of swelling or bruising or discomfort; and if any of these should happen, take it off immediately and correct what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said above concerning the wounds that have been mentioned.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is very painful in the bone to which the bandage is applied, then cover that immediately; otherwise remove it and leave that, and care for the cause of the pain from which this originates until it is healed
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Every bandage should be stretched so that this fracture of the thigh is well adjusted to the bones, as we have said in the instructions and in the manuals.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the limb in this way it does not cause pain to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or if another bandage is applied to the other limb, it is necessary to keep the limb that is being treated immobile
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you must know that the thigh is stretched for 40 days or a few months or a few weeks, according to the diversity of conditions and the other equipment.
Capitol .xv.	End of Document
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	End of Document
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You must know that the fracture of the thigh bone is very painful, but it is not caused by the wounds.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if there should happen to be a fracture, it is not anything more than a tear or fracture in the tissues, and this is either pain or swelling, and about this you must be aware
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the limb is in such a way that it is supported and held together by the tissues that are left intact, without causing any further damage or discomfort
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then cover the wound and put a bandage over the round cushion, if you wish; and tighten the bandage as much as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Consider all the precautions that have been recommended in other fractures, thus as in the case of apostema caut, which is similar to those that are opposed to all accidents that may occur except in cases where it is convenient to do so.
Capitol .xvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.</start_of_turn
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</start_of_turn
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</start_of_turn
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	Consider all the precautions that have been recommended in other fractures, thus as in the case of apostema caut, which is similar to those that are opposed to all accidents that may occur except in cases where it is convenient to do so.</start_of_turn
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	When the bones of the forearm are fractured together, the limb becomes converted into every part.</start_of_turn
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	When the large bone is fractured, the limb should be suspended, for this is one of the causes that brings no harm.</start_of_turn
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And give extension, equalization, and ligature of the bands according to the healing.</start_of_turn
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the limb is slight and there are no soft tissues involved, the extension should be milder and lighter, and relieve with your ability.</start_of_turn
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the limb there is any cause of operation on the forearm, and that is when you have healed the breaks and when you have completed all the work of the operation, then you will take away the dressings from the causes that were kept in place only, and you will make use of white of palm; mix these with those that have little thickness, and do not be afraid of the hands, and make the length of these according to the length of the limb, and of the distance from the bone inwards.</start_of_turn
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And cover over any wound with two covers according to their length, and place one over the part of the limb from one side and the other from the other side, and keep the distance from the bone inwards.</start_of_turn
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And tie the two bandages in three places at the two extremities and at the middle, so that this structure prevents the limb from leaning to the right and left, and remains in a good position.</start_of_turn
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a bandage of cloth has been administered according to the length of the limb; and keep the limb fixed in it so that it conserves that movement.</start_of_turn
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And more than anything else, cover what is fractured so that when it is like that it is properly healed.</start_of_turn
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider in every day the limb and study it in order to discover behind study, and you will keep it from gout and from inflammation or from other causes similar; and when any cause of these occurs, the hours you will take away from it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	End of document.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	The treatise continues with a discussion of fractures of the ankle and foot bones.</start_of_turn
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not often fracture; however, the bones of the foot do sometimes fracture; and the toes hardly ever fracture, and they do not fracture except in exceptional circumstances.</start_of_turn
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot must fracture, and sometimes these bones must be elevated between them, the hours you should put the foot down on the prepared earth as if you were going.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And put one foot on what is elevated from those bones, and put on boots, and press, and heal those until they are reunited in the places.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And put on a plaster and stop the swelling, and put a little stool under the belly of the foot so that two heads of paste can be placed on it.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that which is stretched down, because you have wrapped that up with cloth and with other causes of which you do not approve.</start_of_turn
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three days or four have passed, the hours you will remove the bandage, because you will find the bones healed, or that they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation in these is thus with care.</start_of_turn
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some of the toes are fractured, the hours you will restore those, and heal those as well as you did the thumb and recommend to you the restoration of the toes of the hand.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And thus stop the nail truncated to the length of the toe; and place a little pressure on it; and then leave the foot on this table which is recommended to you, and strengthen that stricture downwards.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May be if the nail is truncated from the bone it will be two or three or more, then you stop over each toe the amount of flesh enveloped in soft marrow, and strengthen the table at the base of the foot, and stand on one of the ends of the table near the sole of the foot so that it has good retention
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you to remember that you do not take into consideration all the causes which we have mentioned in other fractures of the accidents which we have mentioned; and be attentive to every accident with that which covers us.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</end_of_turn>
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the bone of the thigh and of the patella and of the cuboid bone of the foot.</end_of_turn>
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the bone of the thigh is truncated, then cease in the socket the descending fragment which has fallen down, and incline that towards the side of the two by a little, and keep it extended from behind.</end_of_turn
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And thus fill the matrix with cotton, and make a point in the bone of the thigh as expected; and elevate the two little bones gradually, until everything that is outside is forgotten until the fragment of the bone is as expected and the truncated bone returns.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And thus powder over the two little bones, and when you wish to urinate stay away from the cushion so that it is easier and then urinate, and reduce and return that as you began, and return the cushion first.</end_of_turn
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or until he is restored.</end_of_turn
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take once of belladonna and strengthen over the fracture of the bone a tube of sponge; and empty all the bladder into the bone of the thigh, and then cover with sponge in the tube until the bladder is inflamed so that the fracture returns.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And thus keep it filled with cotton and stay until it is healed as we have recommended, until he is sound.</end_of_turn>
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the patella or the cuboid bone of the foot or the bone of the thigh is truncated, then administer in the restoration and agility of these the things which we have recommended in the hip bone.</end_of_turn
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is fractured is not hidden in these primary fractures and that little damage, mainly to him who is the master of study and use of this book; for that fracture signifies to you in the greatest possibilities of recovery in the restoration and tightening of these.</end_of_turn
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But when the cuboid bone of the foot is truncated, take an ointment of vinegar, and put the bone in that; and pause over the covering of wax, and cover, and let it rest for three days or until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of fractures of the bones when it is inflamed.</end_of_turn
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient in that in which the fracture has happened with inflammation, and especially if the bone is great as is the bone of the buttock or of the adductor, or like that, that you take care of these and apply poultices to them as much as possible even if the conditions of phlebitis are to you or your testifiers as we have said.</end_of_turn
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the inflammation subsides healed, then cover that you take care of the retention of them in the same way as you powdered over them when they were crushed, if for another reason it does not exist.</end_of_turn
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And thus begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if it does not happen afterwards.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if afterwards it happens that there is swelling, then leave the restoration of them until the swelling has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth of all, for you will make things worse.</end_of_turn
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the fractured bone is prominent over the navel, then cover that you perforate to reduce that and equalize that with your hands as much as possible and with little extension.</end_of_turn
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared for you and the equilibrium of them with the thighs is tight, then reduce that with your hands as much as possible and this discomfort which is caused by the iron, the length of which is of seven fingers or eight and the breadth is according to the quantity of the inflammation; and for this the doctor must take into consideration these three or four things according to the quantity that he indicates in the care of all kinds of fractures.</end_of_turn
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	E aquesta es la forma de lu:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague persists for several days, and is neither consolidated nor excised from the body, it is understood that here are saturations of the little bodies so that they cover the plague with their attempts.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those saturations which are separated remain and are extruded, those which are not separated remain and cause pain in the limb, perforate you to make an incision according as your ability allows
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the plague causes swelling or swelling, it is stasis, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, the hour covers that you stop when one of these appears from the care that precedes the narration in the previous chapter
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And when the thing that I have said must be done and you are present with your foot: when it is great, consider over the limb just as much as the attendants and like those of the great limbs, and do not presume to draw or extract what may be attracted or extracted except for what is absolutely necessary; having left that which must depart, for that which is strong will fall down by itself within a few days or three months; and the hour cures the plague if you see it, and if not, leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.</end_turn>
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of swelling which happens in the aftermath of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These swelling appear in the aftermath of healing of fracture, and more when they are close to the joints, and are often caused by it the figure of the limb; and the strong limb hinders its natural operation
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer in this medicine which has stopped so much bleeding, and see, and heartburn, and itching, and swelling, and like those; if you take any of these or all of them, and mix them with vinegar or vinegar of almonds or vinegar of olive oil and apply that over the swelling and compress them tightly.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the extraction that you do not extract for several days; and when you extract that, repeat it until the swelling has gone down; or strengthen over that lamina of lead descent, which has the property of healing all that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has already become stone-like and is stretched, and it is necessary to extract it cautiously, the hour cuts that for the greater part of its circumference, and incisions the surplus, or pulls that which is under the skin until it is healed; and cure that which remains until it is healed
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of the fracture when it is restored and when almost all of the limb is still stiff and does not act according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has been restored, and when almost all of the limb is still stiff, the hour is of no use except for some causes: of which one is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the fracture of the limb which does not follow that it covers; or for excessive stricture of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb; or for a multitude of unnecessary embrocation; or for excessive movement at an inappropriate time; or for weakness in the body of the patient and for its weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of this is to feed the patient and make him drink until the healing is multiplied in him; and administer bath; and enter with oil and tell him about it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And leave the foot off the limb, so that the foot does not obstruct the limb from receiving nourishment, or continue to embrocate it with cold water until the nourishment returns to its natural figure
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly and prevents their operation from that which covers them
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the limb has already been restored, and when the healing of the fracture is crooked and prominent at the fractured bone and swelling, and it is for this that the limb is supported in a way that prevents its natural operation, even though the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, the hour does not cover that you should take away the word of that limb which still exists in this way.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Moreover already many fools of doctors and restorers have done this which has brought about this; and this operation is not to be repeated with great fear of the sign which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Moreover if the swelling and the swelling are recent, the hour covers that they are covered with cold water in which there are many cooling herbs, such as fennel seeds and rue seeds, and meadowsweet, and it is like those; or that it is applied with plaster and plaster of Paris like anyone who knows how to do it well; or that it is taken with fennel seeds and is bound with lead or olive oil, and is plastered with that; or that it is taken with fatty figures and is bound with hemp fibers and is like those of the medicines which are not harmful after consolidation
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Every day, when there is a persistent and gentle friction of the limbs, which is more agreeable in the hottest weather and administered with movements of the limb throughout the day, it is dissolved.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Even if stiffness has already departed going downwards and is strong, and has become solidified and is caused by necessity for its care, when it is treated with iron, the hour that the pus becomes loosened and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and it is said that what has overflowed from the swelling of that part which has been infiltrated by the subtle humors of that member is facilitated in that way that it is requested and studied.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXVIII.</end_of_turn>
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of the term dislocation.</end_of_turn
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any joint of the limb, because it is prohibited from movement, and is accompanied by the figure of the limb, and causes great pain and lesions.</end_of_turn>
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an accident of dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perforate as soon as possible so that it can be reduced, and do not delay, for if it is delayed, the limb becomes swollen and strong, which makes it difficult to reduce the dislocation.</end_of_turn
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to help, do not hold your breath or stretch during the reduction, because these movements cause spasms and pain.</end_of_turn
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When an accident occurs, the hour that you must support the patient's fainting, and immediately place it within, and embrace the limb with lukewarm water and oil, and reduce it with ease.</end_of_turn
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all limbs must be treated with the water from which the memory will remain in their limb.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to their order; from the head of the limb up to the foot.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXVIII.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.</end_of_turn
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So displaced are the two mandibles if they are not promptly treated; and the dislocation of both is considered to be complete in two ways: that they are slightly displaced from their positions due to little displacement, or that they are completely displaced and complicated, until they are softened at the junction until saliva from the patient's mouth flows and that it does not cause him to close his mouth or to bite, and that his tongue is enveloped in his words.</end_of_turn
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, the hour in which it is most convenient returns by itself without causing further damage.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and complicated, the hour must urgently administer the reduction, and must not be delayed at all.</end_of_turn
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor puts a finger of his hand on the root of the dislocation of the jaw between the teeth of the patient, if the dislocation is of one part; or that he puts two fingers together at the base of the two jaws, if the dislocation is of two parts, and that the other fingers of the patient are far from these and swallow; and commands the patient to stop his jaws and withdraw those that are not necessary; and the doctor swallows the jaw and closes the jaw until it returns to its proper place.</end_of_turn
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are simultaneously displaced, the hour administers evaporation with lukewarm water and oil, until it is finally successful in reducing both of them and does not delay the reduction of both at the same time, as we have said.</end_of_turn
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are softened, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, the hour pauses over those little grains of sand in the corners, and is made with wax and oil rubbed; and it is facilitated with a bandage.</end_of_turn
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his two sides, with his head resting between two cushions, so that neither the right side nor the left side is strained; and do not force him to bite anything; have the patient's tongue loosened, until when the pains are gone and the jaws are relaxed, the hour may order that he eat.</end_of_turn
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this is administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the patient's mouth during eating and drinking and talking, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.</end_of_turn
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are displaced at any hour and is not converted to the proper positions at that time, the hour must urgently administer fever and strong and constant sweating, and is alerted the patient's belly, and he vomits pure bile.</end_of_turn
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you see it often, you understand that it is harmful; and those who have seen it for a few days know that it will happen to the one to whom it happened in those days.
Capitol .xxv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn>
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.</start_of_turn
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The intestine or hernia is returned to its cavity, and the hand is placed over the area to prevent it from coming out.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</start_of_turn
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And nearby close the wound with your palm with a strong closure, so that it returns.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And nearby place over that plaster and powder and strengthen that.</start_of_turn
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the limb of that one who sits here be preserved and continue like this, not being dislocated in any days; for it has been said that it should be reduced and plastered as has been said and as is appropriate.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And nearby place over that plaster, powder, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.</start_of_turn
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this medicine treatment the limb of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from the thigh bone.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxvi.	End of text.</start_of_turn
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.</start_of_turn
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You understand that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the heel to the toes.</start_of_turn
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from below the muscle, and that is harmful; it is not dislocated to the back for the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front for the nerves.</start_of_turn
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most of all it is dislocated outwards beyond the heel towards the toes, especially in those in which there is little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there is much flesh, it is difficult to dislocate.</start_of_turn
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often times this happens to people by percussion or by falling, and the muscle of the limb is separated from its attachment by a cautery, and is cured in the way that it has already been dislocated.</start_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore you must stay until you are satisfied that it is completely cured, and then proceed with the treatment of the limb.</start_of_turn
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of the limb is when it is beyond the heel towards the toes; so that you must distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, for you will find among those differences various signs; and you will find in the head of the muscle a concavity towards the heel as if there were a hole, and the limb is placed against the touch of the head of the muscle as if it were a fist, and the patient is not able to reduce his hand to the groin or to touch that part for any movement.</start_of_turn
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the heel or from below, and you find it manifested by touch, and it is not hidden.</start_of_turn
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And in this dislocation it is beneficial to perform the reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.</start_of_turn
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of the limb is that the minister raises the hand of the limb above the heel; and nearby place the toes below the heel of the limb, and raise the joint with strength at its joint, and the minister raises the hand and extends it; and nearby pause that so it returns willingly.</start_of_turn
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	May it be that what we have said does not return, and so from the beginning of the dislocation, even if it has been a few days, the patient should be bathed in warm water and should be administered embrocation that softens and lubricates just as if it were a coat of oil, and vinegar, and melilot in water, and should be administered.</start_of_turn
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And nearby the patient should be rested on the two thighs and should be supported below the heel of the limb while waiting for the swelling to go down between elevation and tension, and nearby the physician should place his hand on the hip and raise the head of the muscle with force, and pull the hand of the patient so that it is not bruised below, and another minister should hold the head of the patient, so that it is not bruised below, for that both will return to the joint.</start_of_turn
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish, reduce it in this manner: and let there be a man present who is taller than the patient, and that he stand on that side, and that you insert the thumb of your left hand between the thumb and the great toe of the patient and elevate the great toe to the parts below until the patient's pain is suspended in air, and another attendant shall pull the patient's hand away from the parts below the thumb.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Even if the patient is proud, let it be known that we must exclude other causes, for thus will the great one be cured, since the dislocation will return immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way: let there be placed on the ground a long stick whose head is rounded like a nutmeg, neither fat nor lean, and let it be placed under the patient; for since the head of the stick covers the head of the patient, the patient will be standing according to the length of the stick, and let the hand of the patient be extended to the parts below the other side; and let the body of the patient be stretched out on the other side with force, for the joint will return to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes that we have said, then use this remedy: take a stick whose length is equal to two barleycorns and whose width is that of four fingers, and whose thickness is lessened at the tip like this: ...
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place over the rounded head some lead plates to prevent the stick from injuring the patient.</start_of_turn>
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And let the thumb of the patient be placed under the stick, and let the hand or arms be extended over the stick until the parts below are reached, and let the stick be bound over the attendants and the arms and the limb of the hand.</start_of_turn
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And let the arms be placed on a stool of the height of the patient, and let the hand be extended to the parts below, and the other side be suspended from the other part, so that the joint is reduced immediately.</start_of_turn
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the reduction is complete according to any method that you deem suitable, and when the thumb has been placed with care at a distance from the bone of the great toe; and let there be applied a compress prepared from powdered chaff and alum on the entire muscle, even though it is rotated downwards, and let there be stretching of the thumb with tension downwards; and let the ligament be rotated over the compress, and let the hand be fixed to the limb, and let it be kept quiet for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And let the patient abstain from food little, until the limb is comfortable, for this is more conducive to the healing of the limb.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And let the food be given more often, every seven or eight days, and let some exercise be performed; and thus if it is stopped and is not mollified, the hour is already healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	However, if the joint is dislocated by moisture that has happened to it or by another cause, the hour must be cauterized with three incisions, as is said in the chapter of cautery.</start_of_turn
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this has been done and seven days have passed, and the ligament has been dislocated and the joint has not been arrested, and the compress and the tension have been reduced over them as much as possible, and it is not arrested and does not recover and cannot elevate the limb to the parts below, the hour knows that the nerves of the limb, which are at the head of the muscle, are either insensible, extended or softened, and knows that the joint will never be fixed in place again.</start_of_turn
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	As for the dislocation of that which is caused by the foot or the ankle or the heel, the reduction is useful with impulse and extension of the most, until it returns.</start_of_turn
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let it be administered in this other way, and take care that it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens that the healing of the gravity in the limb is delayed and the movement of the limb is delayed, the hour recommends using cold compresses until that gravity is relieved and returns to its former state.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of treatment for dislocation of the ankle.</start_of_turn
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the ankle joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and that which is dislocated in all parts, and more especially on the outer side towards the inner side, and the dislocation of the ankle is not hidden from you because it is known beyond that it is present whenever the ankle is adjusted, and when the ankle is adjusted it is known that the joint is depressed and the limb cannot be bent, nor can the hand touch the same muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover the testicles, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible before applying the cautery, for if you see the cautery applied directly, the reduction will be difficult, and may not be successful; and this is especially true when it occurs in the groin, for in this case the pain is greater and the testicles are often seen to be swollen to the point of death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of them, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the patient's hand be extended towards the toes, their arms be spread out, and the physician's thumbs be placed over the groin and leave them there, and the patient grasps the joint with their teeth, or at the root of their palm within which the pain has occurred
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	Moreover, if the dislocation is in the front, then return it as soon as possible by bending the knee with your hand, until you have pierced the groin at the root of the palm
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer violent extension and great force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And that two assistants extend the arms, and hold that support of two assistants so that it is not left behind the extension
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And immediately rotate the arms all around, since it is enveloped firmly long over the hand, or ligament
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those things which help to lubricate the joint may be facilitated; and immediately compress the joint with force until it returns
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And immediately after the reduction cover that it is stopped on that plaster in which there is styptic action and exudation with the help of glue, and extend it with stricture descending, and suspend the arm from the collar, and leave it thus for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And so if the joint is formed in the knee joint, then immediately you unfasten the ligament of it and leave it thus
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if the joint is not strengthened, then immediately repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it thus for a few days until it is removed; and then unfasten that
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Moreover, if by chance the gravity tends towards the reduction of the joint, and the situation of the limb is in movement, then administer moisture in oil and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or rest on the joint relaxed, so that there is no greasy movement; and bind it, and leave it so for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And so on, put that in oil; and when the swelling subsides, the physician must gently massage the joint with temperate friction, and immediately repeat over that relaxed, so is round of movement, a little swelling, and the second, and the third, etcetera
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread throughout the bones within the bath, until it has become limp.</end_of_turn>
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, rest upon that wound of the wet and scaly cow, around the border and over that; and make some swellings, because that is wet and reduces the swelling to its situation
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the care of dislocation of the elbow, that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The swelling of the hand many times is displaced, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, and the opposite is true of the other joints, however it is necessary to have speed in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is displaced, before the limb is apostematized or that the cautery is applied to it
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation of the limb is that you rest the wrist of the patient on a table and extend the limb, and the physician places his hand or palm on the area of the joint, and compresses that until it returns to its normal position
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered if the palm is already bent inward of the hand, then the patient must be supported with two hands on a table during the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, you must support the limb with two hands, so that the physician's hand grasps that area of the joint
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns completely, well and good; and if not, the physician must strengthen that with plaster leaving the apostema; and do not repeat that until some days have passed
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint must remain flexible according to its nature; and do not notice to the patient any cause, but that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; the physician should know that the nerves are cut or twisted, and that it is not due to the joint itself but is strengthened by the cautery which is applied to it and the force that is given to it.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the illness has subsided, pause over them the plaster which we have recommended, and leave it on for five days; and then remove it and leave it off, and exercise their hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Even if their movement is painful and difficult, leave them in a warm and humid environment, until the pain subsides
Capitol .xxix.	(The text provided ends here, so I cannot provide a translation for the remaining portion.)
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the joints
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some joints are dislocated throughout their entirety.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger of those which are at the base or at the belly is dislocated, then stop and impede the dislocation by placing a thumb against it until it returns
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And support the head of the finger, suspend the part that is dislocated, and keep that limb for two days
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And suspend it and extend it until it is healed in that limb on the following day
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, bind it as before according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it in the day and exercise it, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is healed
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with the thumb, if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and bind it to that part and do the first operation as before until it is healed
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same with the rest of the joints that are dislocated
Capitol .xxx.	End of Document
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident occurs to any of the vertebrae of the spine or the head is dislocated completely, and some vertebrae move from their places, in such a case there is no cure, for death is hidden in the disease
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of this is that the evacuation of the disease is outside of one's will, and one cannot hold it back; and some veins are softened in some parts of the limb or two veins of the limb or two bones of the limb, or one of these; or one vertebra is displaced from its place, which if some veins are displaced and some are softened, the evacuation of these is four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that which has already been displaced to the back is called gelliosis
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Moreover, the treatment for this is that you consider if the gelliosis is from puberty, for in this case neither cure nor healing of all is possible
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Moreover, in those cases where we perceive the case either by observation or by percussion or by experience, the Ancients themselves have declared long methods of treatment, of which the most useful returns to profit; however, I have already said that I abbreviate this from that which is more lengthy, because of my proximity to the understanding of this, which I have learned from experience and from various instruments which I have seen and used.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that in gelliosis which originates in the foot, neither surgery nor healing of that is possible; and in the same way in that which is caused by two faults
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And that which is not cured except that which originates in the two vertebrae themselves as I have recommended
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the disease be extended over its face over the chest and be held from below so that it does not touch the foot of the limb
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And put a tube which has been torn through to the root near the head of the limb, and another tube in the belly of the limb in the other foot
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister has the tube, and do not hold it in a fossa; and another minister has the other in that form
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And put a cover over the head of the disease and leave the limbs limp; and extend the limb to the tube which is at the head of the limb, and bind that; and strengthen the other limb over the hips of the limb which is below them, and bind the limbs; and adjust all the bands and bind them to the other tube which is at the foot of the limb
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister orders to extend the limb to the part of the tube, and do not displace the two tubes and the bands of the remaining vertebrae in the places where they are placed, however do not stop them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor rests his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns, or rest them on a board, and adjust on the board the two feet until it returns
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If he does not return in this way, take a table whose breadth or length is three cubits, and pierce it through the wall at the place where we said that for this ailment a mark has been made.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the palm of the table on the spine, the doctor places his feet on the other side, and open the belly until the spine is contracted and returns to its place.</end_of_turn>
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the one that is twisted with your hand; and since you are on the ground, place the head of the patient behind the heel of the two thumbs, the length of which is one cubit, and place the head of them behind the heel of the thumb at a distance of two cubits; and let the length be between each thumb a palm, and there is already made in each thumb through which the return has been made, and every one that is not fixed to the ground must be held down so that it is not injured.</end_of_turn>
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there must be a round fist through which the return has been made, and it must be twisted in the two grooves of the two thumbs.</end_of_turn>
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of these there is a groove in which the fist is formed, the length of which is a palm beyond that which is twisted; and in the two other thumbs it is similar to that.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And tighten the ligaments that you have stretched in the feet of the patient at the point where you placed the head of them, and the ligaments that you have stretched in the thighs of them at the point where you placed their feet.</end_of_turn
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And you must also hold every return and have a minister who will hold the return with his hand, and the doctor will bind the spine as we have said.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the manner of the return:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the place is bound, the hour covers that it should be kept pressed with an ointment of oil, and then stop; and place over the ointment the table whose breadth is three fingers or about that, and the length of it as much as covers the area of the swelling, and over the part of the spine that is.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And do as we have said concerning the ligament, and use the patient sparingly of food until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any swelling remains in the place at the end of the healing, the hour covers that medicines which soften and soothe must be administered with the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and they are already administered in that place like molten lead.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And every vein that is close to the back of the two spines, is cured for that dislocation; and that is the bone which has already mentioned that it must not be made faulty by this medicine, for it will cause you to do great harm.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXII.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.</end_of_turn
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You must know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle must not be dislocated alone, but that it must accompany the dislocation of the other joints of the foot away from the concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, that is, towards the inside, or towards the outside, or towards the front, or towards the back.</end_of_turn
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Most frequently it is dislocated towards the inside, and less frequently towards the front or towards the back.</end_of_turn
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation towards the inside is that, when you adjust the limb of the healthy ankle with the limb of the sick ankle, the heel is more prominent than the healthy one, the ankle cannot bend the foot downwards without causing pain, and the area around the ankle is already swollen from the previous burn of the cautery.</end_of_turn
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation towards the outside is that the accident occurs in the opposite way to this one.</end_of_turn
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the dislocation towards the front is that the limb is expanded according to custom, but it does not bend downwards because of the pain, and if you force it to do so, it cannot move forward; the urine is retained and the swelling is considerable, and you must walk on the ankle.</end_of_turn
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the dislocation towards the back is that it does not expand the heel, nor does it permit bending downwards that which bends the ankle, and the limb is shorter than the other, the swelling is softened, and the head of the ankle is placed on that place.</end_of_turn
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, for if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already passed its prime in that it has not responded to previous treatments; therefore, in such a case, it is not necessary to perform any further reduction.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	If the dislocation is recent and belongs to the four principal types, then you must promptly restore the joint and extend it towards the inner and outer parts, and also towards the right and left, until firm stability returns and no further treatment is required
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare to administer force and extend the limb beyond its normal position, or towards the chest, or towards the thighs which are bound together; and another attendant should grasp the limb beyond its nails and support its tips with his thumbs; and press firmly with the thumb on the root of the limb, and have another attendant hold the extremities of the limb.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension of the limb or of the inner part towards the ankle or of the outer part towards the heel or from the back towards the groin.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And the extension of all of these until the patient's body is elevated to the height of the ground and remains suspended
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four types
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	Therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, then it is well done; but if not, then it is necessary in all four types to make the cure as we have said
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocation itself, when it is displaced, and the dislocation is at the ankle, cover that the patient is resting supine on the buttocks; and press the ligaments over the root of the limb in the place where it enters between the head of the malleolus and the place that is beyond the ankle; and extend the limb from the ankle to the knee bone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another attendant must firmly grasp the patient's toes and gently pull the large part of the painful limb outwards for violent extension, until it returns to its place
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This type of treatment is less severe than the others for which this limb is reduced
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused about you and you do not obey the order in this type of treatment, then you must tightly bind the two feet of the patient together with strong thread, with tension, over both the ankle bones and both the nails
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part should be equal to the quantity of four fingers, and the painful limb should be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended about the waist, and that is in the middle; and the length from the ground to the top should be equal to the quantity of two fists
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a a strong youth to press down on the head of the malleolus, and that the patient is suspended by the other youth, and the other youth will push the limb downwards with force, until the joint returns to its place quickly
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction of the dislocation, when it is displaced at the outer part, cover that the patient grasps his heel according to what we have recommended when we applied the gel; and tighten the ligament over the painful limb properly and over the toes of the limb
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two cushions should be placed, one under the patient's feet, and the other under the head; and cushions of the same size should be placed around the waist of the limb which is covered with a wet cloth, so that the patient is not dampened because the cushion is between the patient's thighs, because you must extend the limb outwards without causing tension.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each attendant should extend their hand, and the doctor with his hand grasps the reduction according to the art
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey respectfully, it will go well; but if not, pause diligently and take the advice we have given in the gelbozation for that treatment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Cover that the patient grasps his buttocks slightly forward.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the ankle, then it must be grasped with greater tension; and as is said in this book about the thigh; and the doctor must place the palm of his right hand on the painful ankle, and with the other hand grasp that which is at the other ankle, and with that grasp pause that which is extended towards the toes from the ankle bone.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the limb towards the toes, but to elevate it above the ground; having covered that it must be supported with a firm support, just as it is with the dislocation of the limb towards the outer part, as we have said of its support on two fingers; and is on its face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, without any discomfort
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The joint is to be covered with a compress made of wool on the area where the pain is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is complete as mentioned above, the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you; extend two fingers from the patient's abdomen, and when you once again grasp them and the patient pulls their hand away and expands their wound, then you will know that the limb is returned as it should be—and you will adjust two cushions and stop pressing and pull away the bandage so that the width is not damaged in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the ligature and the dressing, and compare one limb with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see them swell up in the wound, then you know that the dislocation has stopped, and then leave the patient alone.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of discomfort, return it and plaster that, and remove that according to your first order, and leave that for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove that, and make that walk slowly for a few days, until they are comfortable
Capitol .xxxii.	(End of document)</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Treatment for dislocation of the thumb.</start_of_turn>
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thumb is dislocated in three ways, that is, dislocation to the outer parts, dislocation to the inner parts, and dislocation to the upper parts from the lower parts; and it is not dislocated to the lower parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that the patient points to the area with their hand; when you know that the thumb is dislocated
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these positions is that you make the patient draw their hand back, even if they extend their limb again; put two cushions under their leg and put their foot between the thighs; and in addition make them adhere the thumb to their palms and hold that part between the thumb and the other fingers with strength, and another servant will extend the limb until the thumb returns to its place
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of healing is that their limb adheres to the cushion without pain.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster that and make them adhere the limb to the cushion, and tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not let the patient walk for a few days, until they are healthy and comfortable
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction is made by you is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments that have preceded the narration in the treatment of the swelling.
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of book.</start_of_turn
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Treatment for dislocation of the ankle.</start_of_turn
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle joint is sometimes sprained for slight displacement, and sometimes dislocated in compliance, and the dislocation can be either upwards or downwards
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells up proceeding from the part where it is dislocated
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for displacement is gentle reduction, that is, to extend it easily with the most, and to swell up until it returns
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of dislocation in compliance, cover that the patient draw their hand back, and keep that part in the middle of the limb in two fingers of that hand
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And put your right hand on the upper part of the foot and your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the ankle joint
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot towards your right hand, and towards your left for two fingers, and extend your left; and support the ankle of the foot with your right hand at the back of the limb
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do it as we have said above.</start_of_turn>
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And support the foot at the ankle joint for the third time, and you are at the ankle joint.</start_of_turn>
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns once or twice by following this method, and if sometimes the foot swells up, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation until it returns.</start_of_turn
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are forbidden to reduce it in this way, make the patient lie on their side on the ground, and stretch a cushion on the ground, and put a cushion between their thighs, and you have already bound them around the limb like this for so that the patient does not move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The minister of the patient holds their thighs, and another minister grasps the foot towards their toes or the ligament that lies over the heel; and another minister extends each of the hands against the extension of the knee, and the paymaster remains between the patient's thighs to prevent their limbs from being stretched too far from their natural position.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the doctor embraces the dislocation at the knee and another minister holds the sound limb at the thighs, so that the dislocation returns easily
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And thus when the dislocation has returned and you have declared the reduction to be complete, then remove the plaster and stretch the ligament firmly, and bind the foot to the limb.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Beware that you fear or guard the nerves that lie behind the heel, for the ligament over that must not be strained too much and must not be led too tightly
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And thus keep it for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, remove it
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And thus remove it on the fourth day or the fifth, and prohibit the patient from bending their knee for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Even if it is forced to walk before that space has healed, it is not harmful security that the dislocation has not dissolved and become corrupted, and that it will not receive healing treatment
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if after this the patient has a relapse of the pain, cover that you administer in the cessation of the aforementioned narrative in another place of care and support, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 134.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When it has been dislocated, it must be embraced with little extension of the limb; and what is not difficult, be cautious
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is on the ankle bone of the two toes of the foot, then cover that you must keep the patient’s foot still on the ground or on a table, and remain in this position as if walking were taking place
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And thus keep your feet still, and hold the foot over what has been mentioned concerning the joints, and raise that which is over the foot until it has healed, and that you see that it has healed and does not reappear in the immediate vicinity
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And thus place under the belly of the foot of the patient a board that supports the entire foot, which has two caps, and strengthen that which is stretched downwards and closed for three days; and then remove it and let them walk again for a month, until it is healed and the recovery is ensured
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 155.</start_of_turn
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocations that are caused by swelling or fracture or any other injury
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs, and you take care of the treatment and restoration of that, without seeing these things, misfortune often follows death
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And thus do not presume that because of the treatment you will succeed, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, of long practice, merciful and humble, tardy, not proud or presumptuous; and that you should use in the beginning of medicines that bring relief rather than those that only cause harm, and listen to the patient’s complaints, not to your own expectations, for in this way will appear any hope of recovery, both for the alleviation of the disease and for the restoration of health.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And thus do your utmost to effect the reduction in the beginning of the cause, before any relapse occurs
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And thus if the limb returns as we wish, then administer an antidote that will cause the swelling to subside and care for the wound as is appropriate in these cases of dehydration
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is on a fractured bone of the heel bone, and the bone is fractured in two places, then you must break the ligament between them, and do as has been said in the simple diseases of these bones.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Observe and abstain from doing what you are afraid of, following my prediction; for what is better for you than the Creator Himself, and may your permanence be for His glory, and may your prayer be accepted at the right time
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the discourse of Albucasim perfectly, for which God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.</start_of_turn>
