Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The sentence translates to: "Thus begins the speech of Albucasim."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O sons, I have finished this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, in order to perfect your faith in it, and for the praises of its works, and for the declarations of its secrets, it seems to me that I must complete this work for you, which is a part of my art, so to speak, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For our region and our time, surgery is a perilous art, so that the science of it is almost lost; and its signs are few; and it remains only for a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which change all things and even makes void the greatest knowledge and strength of it
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I declare that I have composed this treatise in such a way as to follow the way of exposition and declaration, and to abbreviate; and that I have added to it the forms of the cautery instruments and other instruments of the work as well as for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of the patient, which is necessary
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The greatest cause why you will not find a good surgeon in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that it covers many actors who have not exercised in the science of anatomy, who do not know the joints and the shapes of these, and the connection and separation of these; and the knowledge of bones, nerves and lacerations, and the number of these, and their colour; and of the pulse veins and their sounds, and the places of their sensation.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And as Hippocrates said, I have no name in small works, but I have it in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Indeed, as I said at the beginning of this book, he already mentioned that anyone who is not learned in anatomy will fall into an error which will cause the death of men, as I have seen many of these fall into this error, for they are formed in this science but they throw away this science and these experiments
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I have seen a foolish doctor and expert who has incised an abscess of scrofula in the groin of a woman, and has cut some arteries of the groin so that there flows great blood within her, and the woman died between her thighs.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who believed that he could extract a stone from a man who had suffered from it for a long time, and the stone was great, and he went to him and cut out that stone with a piece of glass, and the man died on the third day
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	I have already mentioned this, and I see that because of the greatness of the stone and the condition of the patient I know that he will die from this.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another doctor who took the stipend of a duke from our land for surgery, and he owed it to a black slave who had been injured in the thigh; and in his ignorance the doctor, without taking any precautions, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pins and needles, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And thus he left him according to his desires, and he relieved him, and he left him for a few days and commanded that he be unbound; and thus the thigh and the foot festered postoperatively and he came to his death
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	I went to him and found that he had unbound him, and he was peaceful and calm and relieved of his pains
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed corruption was already confirmed in the limb, for that I could not restrain it, and I could not stop the corruption of the limb until the patient was in danger of his life
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who pierced an abscess of cancer, and he made an ulcer nearby for several days, until the malignancy of the disease increased and overwhelmed him
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that cancer is pure melancholy humor, and it does not suffice for it to overcome the whole of its effects, but that it should be applied only to the limb which suffers, so that it should be host to all the rest
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	Therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the art of surgery be divided into two parts: that which is associated with health, and that which is dangerous in the greatest precautions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already mentioned this throughout this book in which I have discussed the art of surgery in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary for you to preserve this and to leave that which may cause fools to speak and deceive you
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take up the sacred arms in the request and in the protection of God, and the sick minds in their facility and firmness
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And thus, through the mercy of God, you have overcome adversity and achieved salvation, and praised the blessed succession; you have banished the terrible diseases that were difficult to cure, and finally overcome the weapons of that which you were afraid; so that your faith and your name remain in his sight, for your might rests in his glory.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Indeed, I have already mentioned several times:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“There is no cure for a bad disease, so that no doctor will be called a liar”.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already finished this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Let us begin the division of the book, and first of all from the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is arranged from the head downwards, concerning the forms of instruments and cautery utensils, and what is necessary for the operation
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with swelling and perforation, windbag, ulcers, and extraction of arrows, all categorized and arranged in terms of the forms of instruments
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with restoration and dislocation, treatment of fractures and similar cases; the chapter is arranged from the head downwards, concerning the forms of instruments
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery until fire and acute medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Here begins the treatise of the whole book
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Since I have spoken of the qualities of the instruments of that cautery and the documents of them, and in what completion it is prohibited to make incisions
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the instruments of that cautery and the document of them is a long and profound one, subtle for science, and a secret hidden; and many great scholars have spoken of it, and they have disagreed with each other, and I believe that a small part of their sermons suffices for me, fearing a lengthening of the discourse
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore I say that incisions comply with all universal completion except for two completions, which are caudal completions of its matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the caudal and dry completion of the matter disagreement arises; for some say that cautery is useful for that, while others say that it is harmful. For indeed, the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a disease which is cold and dry should be treated with something that is also cold and dry
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And they say that the opposite is true, that cautery is useful in all cold and dry diseases that are seen in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of a man with the humidity of his body to the completion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say concerning this discourse that I have already experienced several times in my practice
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	I do not say that I have explained all that has been said about that already exists and is practiced in the chapter on cautery after practice, and knowing the diversity of the humors of men and the disposition of diseases in them, and their causes, their accidents, and the passage of time in them
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other completions, it is not a matter of fear for you, and especially in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors have already agreed on that, and they do not disagree concerning the use of cautery in those diseases
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, children, that the secret of treating cautery with fire and the gentleness of it is that fire is simple, and its action reaches only the part that is cauterized and does not affect the other part that is adjacent to it except for a small document.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	And the action of treating with fire for inflammation reaches only that part of the limb from which it is cauterized, and it makes the painful part of the disease of difficult healing come out more easily
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Therefore fire, for its sublimity and its gentle nature, does not do anything other than what we already know through experience and through the length of our studies concerning the art of truth about the causes; and for this reason I am excused from the length of this discourse because it is not legible to me in this place in this book the secret which is hidden with fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and the expulsion of the disease which it expels, as it is demonstrated in philosophical discourse.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to make incisions and when it is best to wait.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that the cautery is convenient at all times, so that for the accidental time it is immersed in the nourishment of that which I call the cautery, which is shot, and more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fiery, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared of those which come with malice, which is greater than a small nourishment entering for the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And I say that it is not necessary to burn other parts of the body, or, fools, those vulgar people and foolish doctors, so that to that disease which is cured by the cautery, it is not ridiculous all the time, and they stop that consequence.</end_of_turn>
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus that they say, because the cautery is nothing but a remedy in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause of these pains.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	More however the cautery surpasses medicine by its delight and worth and greatness of its operation.</end_of_turn>
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that your disease will return at some time, according to the complexion of the disease and the location of the disease, and the worth of them, and what is prepared in the body of them by the gathering of the superfluities in them, and what is obtained by them in their acquisition in food and the like of those causes; but the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a few superfluities and humors, just as if it were cautery of a tooth for pain and the like of that, possible is that in them the said pain does not return, even though it is made small.</end_of_turn
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it may be said vulgarly that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and is a miraculous thing, not as those understand it, because they grow that it is not a cure that makes use of either medicine or any other cause except the cautery itself.</end_of_turn
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine is true only when they administer the methods of healing in certain diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and therefore in the end of the cause they administer man cautery, and make use of that.</end_of_turn
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And indeed it is said that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the vulgar people and fools doctors have of it.</end_of_turn
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And I say that the ancients said that the cautery with gold is better than the cautery with iron, and I do not say anything but for the equality of the gold and the fineness of its substance.</end_of_turn
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And I say that the place of the cautery does not make it weak, as it is not absolutely true, for I have already seen that it does no harm to any other part, and that the cautery with gold is better than that with iron, as they say; however, when you make cautery with gold and fire, it is not your will that is the cause, for it is ignited according to the quantity you wish for the roughness of the gold, and that prepares to receive heat; and if you mix them over the fire the gold will be consumed by the fire, and if you do not mix them well some plates will be left unburned because the artist will take up the space of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason the cautery with iron must be made more lightly and more cautiously of the operation.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those from the head downwards, so that I may relieve the seeker of what he demands of me.</end_of_turn>
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery of head pain for coldness and humidity.</end_of_turn
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.</end_of_turn
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers on coldness and humidity about the accidental cause of which it gives rise, so it is the cause of soda and multiple fluxes rheumatic, applied to the head to the flanks of the heels and the swelling fluent, and multiple sleeplessness, and toothache and swelling of the tonsils, and universally of all diseases that come from coldness, even as paralysis, hydrophobia and apoplexy, and it is similar in these diseases.</end_of_turn
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The way of this cauterization is as follows: first command the patient to evacuate with laxatives for three or four nights, according to the excess of the virtue of the disease and the age of the patient and his custom.</end_of_turn
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to raise his head on a razor, and do that between his thighs on a fallen bench and that he rest his hands on his feet.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then stop the shaving of your palm near the bulge under the nose between the knees.</end_of_turn
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be so, since the physician has said of the said limb that it has arrived, signify that limb at the source of the pain, and immediately apply the cautery with olive oil of the kind mentioned.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And immediately suspend that over the limb which is causing the pain, in such a way that it descends gradually, with your hand tightly clasped around it, and you rotate that
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And immediately lift your hand slightly and support the limb, and if you see any quantity of bone exposed whatever its quantity, as much as a grain of wheat, elevate your hand, and if you do not turn your hand back at that point, at another, if it is cold, until the bone is seen again as I have said to you
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And immediately take a little salt and dissolve it on the limb and keep it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And immediately suspend over the wound the edge bound by a border and keep it there until the burn mark of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And immediately treat the limb with tetracycline until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And I say that when the wound remains open, take honey from the brace, because it is better and more helpful
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	I say that the bone must be cauterized until it reaches the bone, and that the cautery must be kept on until all parts of the substance of the bone are solidified.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And immediately let there be rest that is appropriate for the bone, and immediately cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And I say that the cautery must reach the posterior part of the limb, so that in front of the bone it should strengthen the price in front of the bone rather than weakening it. This is the form of small alphbetization:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that from that limb the vapor of the head escapes
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound remains open for a long time, and immediately cure it when it is solidified
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two kinds of cautery in all my life, except for a few fools according to their way of thinking; and leave that, for me, is better for health, when it is; because the head is developed by the solution of continuity of its like in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of fiery nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first kind of cautery is better and more helpful for me; and from that one here and from that work I find health.
Capitol segon.	End of document.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head chronic pain occurs for a long time and the disease is prolonged, and it uses herbs, poultices, cataplasms, plasters, butter, millet, garlic, vinegar, and radish, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which they count on and which does not benefit it from those causes, then consider that if the head of the disease has great fiery nature; and it is not fiery nor does it find great cold, then cauterize with another cautery leaving a little space between them.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And immediately cauterize that over the joint of the heel with the cautery until the bone is fractured
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and uncover from the bone the quantity that we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery in the posterior part of the head in the area where wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand away from there, and do not uncover the bone, because the disease from this will find great pain other than the pain of all the other cauteries of the head
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I say this cautery in its place, because the cautery of the corn of the head and the occiput is more subtle than that of the middle part of the head; and this is its form
Capitol ters.	End of document
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of ancient cauteries.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain all over the head, or widespread pain in the heel, evacuate with medicines the head slightly flexible, and administer the other treatment which I have mentioned in the sections on diseases; and all this without benefit, for the cauterization in this case is in two ways: either with acute burning medicine or with a burn
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The cautery with burning medicine is that you take a spoonful of alum, and sprinkle that on and remove the extremities of it from both heads
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And immediately prick the area of the pain in the temple with a lancet so that the bone is left visible
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And now stretch over them and stop the constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove it and bring it close, and leave the wound covered for two or three days, and then rest over it until the limb makes a brace.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And do the same until it is healed
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you wish, faith that many medicines which I have written in the previous treatise of medicinal remedies will combat these.</start_of_turn>
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be performed according to this manner: fire for the cautery of which this is the form:</start_of_turn
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called closed nails, because its head is like a nail with a curvature, and in the middle of the limb there is a small protrusion.</start_of_turn>
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And rest upon the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the wound which is left does not adhere — and slowly withdraw the needle little by little.</start_of_turn
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is adhered by the property of the ointment is as much as the majority, elevate your hand so that the artery is not adhered which is left, so that there is no obstruction of the flow of blood.</start_of_turn
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And soak the limb in salt water and rest it upon the limb, and leave it for three days; and then rest the limb liberally with a border, and do the treatment until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, cauterize at the extremity of the cuticle according to the cautery, and keep the incision of the artery in this place properly not antique.</start_of_turn
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery of antique embolism.</start_of_turn
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you have cured the embolism as we have said of the preceding treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and you do not take advantage of the treatment, and sometimes for the disease that does not reach that which we have said of the first cautery with medicine or of the cautery with fire, when you light the cautery of the cuticle until it is whitened, since it signifies over the limb where the pain is in the line of length of which is the majority of the finger, or whatever; keep your hand still for a moment and stretch it until you have incised the artery and reached the bone.</start_of_turn
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	But it is necessary that you take care of the continuity of the mandible, which is bad for chewing, and that the nerve is not adhered and that the muscle which has that is not affected, and that no spasm occurs.</start_of_turn
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood of the absected artery, which is feared, and more so to that which ignores what is done and is negligent; leave the operation in them at the beginning.</start_of_turn
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to remind you of the regimen of the flow of blood in accidental embolism according to the custom of this book.</start_of_turn
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that does not support this cautery and you see the limb of the disease tolerable, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of stretching of the artery with two nails, and this cautery is better and more convenient.</start_of_turn
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.</start_of_turn
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery of the pains of the heel.</start_of_turn
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the heel there is pain due to cold and it is cured by means of lacative causes and by the other treatment which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, when the fire is lit, this is the one which has no point, of which this is the form:</start_of_turn
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And bring the point close to the ignition, and let it be surrounded by the entire heel as if it were rolling, or in the circumference of any limb if the pain is in any limb.</start_of_turn
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with you the cautery of the root of the heel a little at a time because you have seen that it bears.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you cauterize ten points throughout the heel, and which are those, and do the treatment of the wounds until they are healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de turtura.	From cautery of the torus.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The torus which is cured and by cautery is nothing other than the specious things which cause swelling, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.</end_of_turn>
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the specious thing which must be dry or which causes spasm of the nerve.</end_of_turn>
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you have cured that specious torus of boils and carbuncles and abscesses, and you have completed the treatment, do not touch the cure, for at that time you must cauterize the patient three times: the first to remove the root of the abscess, the second a little beyond the temporal bone, and the third to join the two lips together.</end_of_turn
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And leave the cautery point untouched for the opposite of the affected part, for it does not matter except for the part that appears to be well.</end_of_turn
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way of cautery is that you cauterize that which is at the root of the limb above a small amount over the head of the toe, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the finger which you are pointing to, and withdraw your hand from the cautery until the quantity of the matter of the species of the heel has been consumed.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is of the surgeon, the form of which is like a table.</end_of_turn
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	More importantly, it is better to leave a little less rather than too much; and cover with it of excessive thickness a little.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area like that which is denant proceeds until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cautery of ancient apoplexy.</end_of_turn
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When the apoplexy is ancient and you have cured that which we have said and it does not have fever, then cauterize that which is four times: over all the toes of the foot; at the heel and the middle of the foot, as we have said; and in the heel.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is sufficient as has been said.</end_of_turn
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized at the mouth of the stomach; and it is better later; and do treat like that which proceeds.</end_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cautery for painful forgetfulness.</end_of_turn
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover that the patient has given to the disease at the beginning with large doses of castor oil and pills that serve to soften it.</end_of_turn
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then uncover the head of the patient throughout the whole illness and keep him from spitting, applying the plaster as is described in the treatise on plastering.</end_of_turn
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And withdraw any herbs, for that is the manner of the cautery.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do thus according to that method which I have already said.</end_of_turn
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if for those who are well it is good; and if not, then do three cauteries at the back of the foot, which are dependent from the most superior part of the head to the most posterior part of the heel.</end_of_turn
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And withdraw between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and do treat the cautery like that which proceeds.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	More if you are addicted to it and the patient is tolerant, then do cauterize at the middle of the foot; and if you wish greater addiction, then cauterize that over both toes.</end_of_turn
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Like that when it is healed; and the cautery olive oil like that which is described in the preceding manner.</end_of_turn
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cautery of nails and of softening of all the body.</end_of_turn
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you are processing in the softening of the head with large doses of castor oil and as we have said; and uncover the head of the patient, and cauterize that which is cauterized in the middle of the head, and over all the toes of the head, and over the posterior part of it, and three cauteries over the vertebrae of the heel.</end_of_turn
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of the limbs that the patient be tolerant and the disease is strong, then do cauterize that which is four times over the vertebrae of the buttocks, and immediately cauterize until it is consumed by the matter of the heel, and remove the hand.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And thus care for the one who is well, and this is the cautery of olive oil.
Capitol .x.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cautery of olive oil.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized which is epileptic, but that which is for flexure
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore modify the head of the patient at the beginning and at the end of the treatment and the other care that we have dictated in the division when the disease is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer from medicines, then give Guarantees and masticators to him, giving him this for a few days, for the benefit of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And thus remove the head of the disease, and then cauterize that which is like a cautery in the middle of the head according to the preceding manner, and on another side cauterize in the occiput of the head, and over every joint of the head if necessary
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the disease is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that which we have said, having paralyzed and softened the body over the vertebrae of the loin and the vertebrae of the thigh
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let olive oil be cauterized as aforesaid
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	May be if the disease is a child, then pause the cautery slightly according to this manner
Capitol .xi.	End of text
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cautery of melancholy
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and great inflammation, then cauterize that which we have said is to paralyze
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive liquid that is declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which softens the head of him according to what has been said in the division
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And thus remove the head of the disease, and then make a gentle turning of the head downwards, and remove that which is in the middle of the head
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient is to sit down fallen, and is to be held entirely apart
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And thus stop the liniment; and it is more worthy to border against the edge of sheep
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And smear that over the fire for temperate heat for measure, which says suffer when it is more in it
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And thus put that in the middle of the head of him in the circle, and keep it until it is inflamed
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give him to drink every week a quarter of a pint, with the other rule of him be well until he is healed; or if you will, cauterize that which makes little points according to the most of him, but keep your hand over him in this order: this is the kind of cautery which humps the head equal.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And thus stop that swelling inwards in border or in gray of gutta
Capitol .xii.	End of text
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cautery of water descending in the sweat
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you at the commencement of water in the sweat for the symptoms which I have said in the division, then commence and give him to drink the patient that which softens the head of him, and keep away from him all humors.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him sweat in bath in lukewarm water for a few days
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And thus command him that he raise his head, and cauterize that which is like a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize that which is like two cauteries over two temples if it is the commencement of sweating of water in two sweats, or of one half if it is the commencement of sweating of water in one sweat
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incisions are to be made over all the veins and arteries which are left to the root of the codena; and let the cauteries be made in that length in the breadth of the temples
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep your hands away from the blood when it is cauterized; and if you see that there is blood, stop any medicine that is to you possible
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I saw that the knowledge which is in the extraction of arteries and the abstinence from those and caution of fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And each vein is cauterized at the root of two bones with two cauteries that are produced immediately.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cautery of ancient tears
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are ancient, that is to say when they have been accumulating for a long time through veins and arteries that are in the visible part of the head and it is confirmed that these are useless fatty drools, then cauterize that which we recounted in the chapter on the commencement of water concerning the veins in the eyes, and at the middle of the head and at the two temples, and two cauteries at the root of two bones
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you disagree with the addition, then cauterize that in all the breadth of the heel on the edge of the nail with a small cautery
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cautery of the smell of the nose
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your physician has said what we have said in the division and does not benefit from your medicine, then you appear and give to the patient to drink for three nights; and approach his head and cauterize that which is between the two humps and the olive
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And approach cauterizes that which is between the two nails with two cauteries over the two nails of the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And take care that you do not burn the vessels that you do not burn those
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And concerning the cautery of the nail this is the form
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery of the softening of the eyelids of the eyes
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery of this kind; and this is the way to do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that over the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries throughout, and let them stretch from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much your hand with the cautery, but as much as the third part of the eyelid is adhered
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when it turns to black spots and turns the eye purple
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the spots of the eye are converted to black spots even if you prick the eye, cauterize in those two ways, that is either with the cautery or with medicine that burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you do the cautery with fire, command the patient to drink something that softens the eyes as those which cause them to swell up, until they are prolonged and equal; and if you prick that, you must strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that they are not painful until the spots disappear
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore when they are prolonged and equal, the physician should remove the patient's head from the bed and approach the eyes of the patient with the tweezers, with a signal that is like the figure of a dead fern, and let the beginning of the signal be near the spots
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And approach pause in sponge soaked in vinegar or in mucus of herbs on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And approach cauterize in this way.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And approach cauterize over the signal which you have given, little by little, in soft veins, until the surface of the wound which is like a dead fern is completely consumed, that is to say like a fern leaf, all in appearance properly
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the healing of the wound is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting and the spots of the eye already raised beyond the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and approach pause over it with a border until the scar is healed
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And approach take care of that until it is healed
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns for any reason approach strengthen the eye again and the eyelid is softened, then do another cautery over that all just as you did at the beginning.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	May it be so that if they are pressed in the palm of their hand, then cauterize that which is elevated to the natural locus and is equal, and that they may not put out the smell.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery be as with medicine, for it commands the patient to rest the pain within that it is prolonged and equal, and then make a burn of paper like the shape of a myrtle leaf.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take from saffron with wine a little bit. namely.</end_of_turn> Or what, mix those things together, and make a fomentation so that it is not heated; and spread that on the paper which is made like a myrtle leaf, and put a cover over the smell or both; put the patient's head in the gut in a basin of water, and the chief of the patient is in the belly.</end_of_turn>
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And say about the medicine and put a little on it so that the patient does not feel the bitterness of the medicine, for the bitterness is in them like fire.</end_of_turn
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the other bitterness has passed, then read the medicine and do not put it on the belly as you were told; when the bitterness has passed, then remain the medicine and wash the smell with water; and when you consider that the palm is already lifted like that which is washed after the constriction with fire or incision, for the palm is thus good; and if it does not return from the medicine on the place where you did not put the medicine and did not burn it until the operation is complete and the smell is contracted.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And so rest over the wound until the swelling of the wound has passed away, and care for that which is painful in the morning or at another time until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to know that you must keep an eye on the wound so that no more medicine falls out of the wound, and if the palm is somewhat bruised for several days, that any cause of the pain in the palm is softened, the doctor shall repeat the medicine on that place where the palm is softened, just as you did at the beginning, and in this way you will do away with the cause of the pain.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of a myrtle leaf.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the humors of men are diversified according to their magnitude and their smallness, and therefore according to what is useful for your contraction.</end_of_turn
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not be ashamed of the way things are done in this art.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of the fistula which is in the tear duct of the eye.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure the fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of the diseases and you do not confer your care, then you must know that you must cauterize that in the following manner: command the patient to rest their head on the belly, and keep their head supported by any attendant between the thighs in such a way that it is neither too tight nor too loose on the head.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And do so put the heel in a basin of water or in mucus on the palm of the hand.</end_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so burn with the cautery which is like this:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is convex, like the shape of a tube or like a scorpion's tail, from one extremity to the other where the cautery is applied.</end_of_turn
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you want, penetrate through to the other extremity.</end_of_turn
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, come out like that which is trying.</end_of_turn
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is convex is better for the work.</end_of_turn
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if the fistula is open, then press on it to bring it to health and dry that.</end_of_turn
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it up and extract the pus from it.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And so rest over the wound for a little while after you have cauterized, so that your hand does not become numb or the patient is not disturbed, and then remove the cautery from the palm of the hand and cover the wound.</end_of_turn
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of the treatment the cautery went through the bone, that is well; but if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice more, if necessary; and leave that for three days, and then rest over that wound near the border and send for it to be dried until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If he has remained ill for several days and is not cured, then immediately suspend aggressive treatment until the bone is exposed and treated as you deem appropriate in the chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Another method of cautery for fistula is as follows: enter the fistula and cut through it, then immediately stop at the root of the fistula. The amount of blood that escapes is insignificant; hold your hand firmly over the wound to prevent further bleeding, and do not cause the patient additional pain by causing more bleeding. Cover the wound with a cloth soaked in urine or water, as the blood will adhere to the fistula and promote healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed with the cautery and care described previously, that is sufficient; but if not, it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper location
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Concerning the cautery of the wound.</start_of_turn>
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motes of blood often accompany wounds, especially in children.</start_of_turn
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those wounds as we have said in the divisions and do not neglect your care, it is necessary to make a small incision according to this method:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the curvature of the incision according to the thickness of the skin.</start_of_turn
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Immediately stop the bleeding around the wound as soon as the cautery reaches the bottom of the wound.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Concerning the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.</start_of_turn
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the wisdom of the uvula or on the palate or on the wisdom teeth there is an abscess and the swelling is great, and it is ruptured, and it is softened, and the fistula is formed, and you do not neglect the treatment, then you must ignite the cautery according to the amount of pus received in the fistula, and put that flame into the cavity of the fistula, and hold your hand over it until the flame reaches the bottom, and after that remove it with some blood clots; and take care of the wound as we have said concerning the treatment until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore, if the abscess is simple and the wound is healed, that is sufficient; but if not, it is necessary to uncover the location and remove the corrupted bone as we will explain in the chapter.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.</start_of_turn
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Concerning the cautery of the teeth and the softening of the veins.</start_of_turn
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are blackened, and you treat them with medicines and do not fear them, then immediately suspend the treatment in the bowels of the patient, and immediately ignite the cautery in the shape that will be useful, while you keep your hand over the tooth until the flame reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And immediately remove your hand, and repeat the cautery a few times as you wish.</start_of_turn
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And keep the patient's mouth filled with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then remove it, because the blackened tooth is calmed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted humidity is dried up.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.</start_of_turn
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Concerning the cautery of toothache.</start_of_turn
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When the toothache is caused by cold, or if it is hot or does not respond to treatment with medicine, then the cautery can be performed in two ways: either by cautery around the tooth or by cautery with fire.</start_of_turn
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery around the tooth is to take the edge of the cow and put it into a crucible of iron, and take hold of the tooth with your hand and cover it with the edge of the cow, and immerse it in the cold, and immediately stop the bleeding around the tooth until it is cooled.</start_of_turn
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat the process a few times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	Or if you wish, immerse cloth or cotton in the blood of the said limb and put it on the painful tooth, and keep that over the flame until the flame reaches the bottom of the tooth.</start_of_turn
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	The fire of the cautery must be strong enough to consume the quannula of fat or iron, even if there is any roughness in the body of the patient, for the intensity of the flame should not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	The fire of the cautery must be strong enough to consume the shape of which it comes, and keep that over the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery is cool; and do whatever vegetables are necessary so that the pain may subside on this day or on another day.</end_of_turn>
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And so it must be commanded that the patient open their mouth wide with good will and keep it open for an hour, and then close it; this is the way of the cautery.</end_of_turn>
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And burn as much as you can of the extremities according to your ability.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the way of the cannula:</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cautery of extrusions.</end_of_turn>
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrusions are caused by cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, you must cause digestion of those lightly by fire. The fire must consume the shape of this, having two limbs covered so that the smoke does not reach the other limb, and keep the flame over that limb for a while, and do the same with the other if necessary, until the pain has passed the root of the limb.</end_of_turn
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is slight, keep the cautery away from the quantity of the swelling, and apply pressure to it for three days and keep your hand over it covered in fat until it has subsided the amount that the fire has consumed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is burnt and tense and wrinkled until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or give the cautery in such a way as to convey it.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery of the root of the tongue and of the constriction of the throat.</end_of_turn
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity is over the root of the lung, and especially when it is cold air, the patient must be evacuated with laxatives at the beginning with medicines, and then burn that which is beyond the root of the tonsil in the recessed part.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Beware that you do not reach the tonsil with the cautery or burn the edge of it but only a little.</end_of_turn
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And burn that which is beyond the other burn beyond the joint of the colon at the back of the vertebra of the spine.</end_of_turn
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The burn of the spine must be like that described above.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is before until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery of the lung disease and cough.</end>
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors and the patient has no fever or sweating and is old disease, then burn twice on the furcula in the recessed parts around the tonsils and below; and once in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and do the burn like that described above.</end_of_turn
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make the burn with the cautery that is called punctate, the form of which you will find in the puncture of pain of the heel.</end_of_turn
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And give them punctures among those; and take care of that which is before until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And already the burn has three steps that the burn is in that one: one time you can make three burns according to this form.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery of the titillic which is the head of the assistant.</end_of_turn
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is displaced due to oily humidity and is not fixed at the time of harvest must be removed until it is accustomed to return, and in a small movement it is loosened as much as necessary, as we have testified, the patient must be instructed to reduce the displacement first, and then turn the patient over on the seat or on the side; and lift the heel which is in the armpit of the assistant towards the parts below which are on the side of your left hand if the joint is displaced towards the armpits.</end_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then ignite the cautery twice without covering its head; this is the way to do it.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then ignite the cautery twice without covering its head; this is the way to do it. And when it penetrates to the other side, the cautery figure will be that of four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so adjust according to the quantity; and this is the way to do it.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Every burn is adjusted according to this count and because they are eight cauteries
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place your hand over the cautery immediately with salt, and then adhere the patient to tranquility, and do not move the limb for any time until it is comfortable
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the base of the thumb and it is necessary to do so, then cauterize over the muscle under the thumb or over several points of the thumb, so that the joint is stabilized and the moisture is reduced and the patient is healed
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVVI.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cautery of the stomach.</end_of_turn>
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moisture in the stomach due to the excess of its digestion and if you continue your treatment methods and do not confirm, then it is necessary to place the patient on their side two steps up, extend their limbs and thighs, and then cauterize with three cauteries: on one cautery leave the toes for the quantity of one thumb under the thumb, and on two cauteries leave the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery appears; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted that will make the pain less painful.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the burn is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the nail of the thumb
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the burn should be as follows: thus proceed with the addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach as follows; and this is a burn in the shape of a circle as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize the stomach punctate where it is sensitive from this burn. And that you mark on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish on the thumb, and then cauterize at those points; and care for that which precedes until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVVII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cautery of the painful heel.</end_of_turn
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the heel due to cold, moisture or excessive wind compared to the normal expulsion of the bowels, and it is cured by what we have said and without confirming, then it is necessary to place the patient supine on their neck, and mark with three cauteries as follows and with this quantity on the heel beyond the hip bones, between the heel bone and the malleolus.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the thumb, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the bone to be treated
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not press on the cauteries too much.</end_of_turn>
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of the liquid that is poured out is equal to the amount of the nail of the thumb, do not adjust it further; and if the patient is standing on their feet, if it is not standing, then be still, which has already extended their thighs, and lift the knees high.</end_of_turn
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the burn:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you may possibly cauterize these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when it is in your skill and prudence in the art.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not process too much in the cautery, and that you cover the entirety of the stomach so that the whole body is cauterized and reaches the intestines, for the stomach is subtle here; and take care that you do not burn it.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVVIII.</end_of_turn
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the perforation of the heel abscess with a cautery.</end_of_turn
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an extrusion or abscess in the heel and you wish to know if that abscess is in the bone of the heel or in the membrane of it, then if it is in the bone of the heel, the pain is intense and the swelling is increased.</end_of_turn
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the heel, with great pain which often exhausts the doctors in their care of it.</end_of_turn
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore cover the patient with a sheet; then touch his foot with the thumb; and with the cautery ignite the portion which is like a rag, as is described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And burn until the whole area is covered, until it reaches the cartilage, until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other wounds until they are healed
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this method of cautery except for those whom we have studied in the art of medicine, and in whom many bad diseases have been overcome; for in this case, if you experiment too much with this operation, you will cause more harm than good.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXVIX.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery of the sole of the foot.</start_of_turn>
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	I say that the ancient cautery of the roots of the aristology towards the sole of the foot is done in this manner; take from the roots of the aristology a long dry stick which is found, and which is of the thickness of the finger.</start_of_turn
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And immerse that in oil and put it in the fire, and then cauterize for a little in that place which is between the continuation of the heel bone and the ankle; and with two small cautery needles leave two guides, one slightly declining towards the side which is beyond the beard, and two cautery needles in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the hip, declining slightly towards the back; and another cautery needle in the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cautery needles from the back parts; and one cautery needle in that place which is between the two buttocks, and two cautery needles from the two sides of the foot, leaving the cautery needle which is between two buttocks.</start_of_turn
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not put your hand over the cautery, but rather in the manifestation of the heel in work.</start_of_turn
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And I say that the ancient people used cautery of iron similar to a ray and fire, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until we reach that cartilage and it is healed, as we have said concerning the heel of the foot.</start_of_turn
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Moreover in this perforation there is no fear, because we often do this in the fistula where there is no healing.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.</start_of_turn
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the heel.</start_of_turn
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you have cured the disease of the heel according to what we have said in the division, and you do not confer your care, then the hour of cautery comes in three ways, which are all useful, namely that you make three or four lines according to the length of the heel according to the figure of the cautery needles of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.</start_of_turn
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery there should be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of cautery should be the manner which we have said concerning the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not put your hand over the cautery; and the patient should be even on the side of the two thighs.</start_of_turn
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another manner of cautery is that you ignite the cautery having two supports, which causes we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the heel which is in the end of the heel the bone to protect the heel of the disease.</start_of_turn
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such as to lift the heel according to the length of the limb, so that the cautery is made according to the breadth of the body.</start_of_turn
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And bring together the two supports, ignite once, in that place where we have pierced the heel of the other side.</start_of_turn
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then take out the cautery; and thus there are four cautery needles.</start_of_turn
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	Or if you wish, cauterize with three supports.</start_of_turn
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And keep your care of the cautery longer than it has lain without moving for a few days, because it is different from the other preceding causes in the treatment.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery of the heel of the Achilles.</start_of_turn
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The cautery is not done in ydropici but in alcinte properly.</start_of_turn
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you have cured the hydropic swelling by the methods of treatment which we have said in the division, and you do not fear the treatment, then you must know that he should cauterize four cauteries on the circumference of the abdomen and one on the stomach, and one on the heel, and one on the spleen, and two between the vertebrae of the two, and one in the middle of the foot, and one on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be in proportion to the spiciness of the wound
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then apply oil to the cautery so that it does not burn for a long time
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment until after the cautery has closed so that they do not become infected, and give them food to eat with the help of the healer.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery which should be used to cauterize the abdomen is the claw, according to the shape of that which is precedent, and that which is precedent to its form is the olive
Capitol .xxxii.	End of text
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cautery of feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrosis and are filled with sour urine, know that you must cauterize the feet over the two toes without neglecting the area between the heel and the ankle; raise your hand over the cautery and do not touch it again; and raise your hand again, and do not take it away, because the sour urine remains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is cauterized thus: and make two cauteries on each side of the thigh, and in each part make a cautery at the extremity of the cautery cut
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery must be of the length of the thigh: leave the nail on the upper part and the other put the middle of the foot in the place of the thigh; and make two cauteries on each thigh
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And keep the wound open for a long time so that any urine does not remain in it
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And take care of those causes which we have mentioned
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of treatise
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cautery of the body of the abdomen
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the body of the abdomen is hot and humid due to excessive vomiting, it is the digestive and retaining virtue which is in the stomach and the intestines, and it is cured by the methods of treatment and you do not fear them, and sometimes the patient suffers from a discharge of virtue showing that it is necessary to cauterize, and then make a large cautery on the flank of the stomach as it has been said previously in the cautery of the stomach, and over the circle and four cauteries on the circumference of the abdomen below the navel, and one over the spleen, or two.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the external humors and the patient tolerate it, then you must cauterize over the pelvis and over the intestines, and firmly apply two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, which is a perfect cure for the benefit of which you will not err
Capitol .xxxiv.	End of treatise
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of cautery of ancient hemorrhoids
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are in nature behind hemorrhoids ancient or from gross cold humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured by the methods which we have said in the division and you do not fear the treatment, then you must cauterize with three cauteries over the base of the two small vertebrae and small triangular, and remove the navel cord by two cuts
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the stomach of them is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face is sometimes pale, then you must cauterize that one over the stomach with a large cautery as it has been said previously; and one on the heel and one on the spleen, and keep the cautery for some time open, and then care for them until they are healed
Capitol .xxxv.	End of treatise
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cautery of the thigh near the abscess of their loin
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When your thigh abscesses, then you must cauterize that which is like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And put out the fire in that thigh abscess, and finish the hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the healing comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make water or two, for if they are of a large size, then you must cauterize each one of them as we have recounted, and take care of them with that which we have said is good for them until they are healed
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you burn with a large cautery on something, it is more dangerous in judgment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	If you burn with a large cautery on something, it is more dangerous in judgment.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	When you burn fistulas that are useful in nature, it makes them worse in the parts of the body.</start_of_turn
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is terrified by it, whether he is healthy or sick.</start_of_turn
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is old, corroded by blood and corrupted humors, and it is more deserving than anything else to be treated with caution, and it is to be performed with great care.</start_of_turn
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Therefore, use the cautery that is similar to a ray.</start_of_turn
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And use that cautery ignited in this fistula, according to the amount with which the tenta is intertwined.</start_of_turn
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that until those corrupted parts are burned to a reddish hue, two or three times, according to the amount of your need.</start_of_turn
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula is in the area of the bladder or the belly, then beware of all those areas; and do not proceed until the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area until it is healthy.</start_of_turn
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and so removed from it the matter, and remains quiet for a long time, then know that it is already completely healed.</start_of_turn
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of the corruption, or that it proceeds from those causes from which it will remind you in its place.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxvii.	End of Document.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cautery of the humors.</start_of_turn
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the humors there is pain due to cold or excessive wind, and in order to help relieve the patient's suffering, it is customary to cauterize over the humors with a pointed cautery, over each of the humors that precedes the memory.</start_of_turn
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And so perform the cauterization three times in a row, so that they will be more effective in judgment.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxviii.	End of Document.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cautery of the bladder.</start_of_turn
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder suffers from inflammation and softening due to cold and humidity, so that the patient does not retain urine, it is customary to cauterize in the lower part above the bladder, at the start of the fifth finger, and cauterize with a cautery on the right and left sides.</start_of_turn
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery is according to the quantity of the patient's urine; and cauterize with two cauteries if necessary.</start_of_turn
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be pointed as it is performed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxix.	End of Document.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cautery of the uterus.</start_of_turn
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and humidity in the uterus, and to prevent excessive inflammation, and when the menstrual blood is corrupted, and when it is delayed in its appearance, and when there is pain that comes from it, it is customary to cauterize the area around the navel with three cauteries, as we have said concerning the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery over the lower part of the abdomen, or with two cauteries. And let the cautery be pointed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xl.	End of Document.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cautery for dislocation of the ankle.</start_of_turn
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is mucous humidity in the ankle, and when there is an excessive pressure on the limb due to the dislocation, and when it is an indication that the swelling is prolonged over the other when compared to each other.</start_of_turn
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the area of dislocation is grasped in it where it hurts.</start_of_turn
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, cover that the patient with the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, as you have seen in the circle of the limb when it is rotated, and so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.</start_of_turn
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	The cautery which precedes this formation is the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize with three cauteries, with an olive oil cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be performed according to the quantity of spiciness of the whole codena; and take care that it is not damaged
Capitol .xli.	End of document
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the ankle area, caused by cold and humidity, the disease is cured with what has been said and not confirmed, and when it is old, then you must keep the patient away from humors which come from solid pills or artificial pills or something similar; and then cauterize that.</end_of_turn>
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of cautery in this case is according to two manners: either with medicinal substances that burn, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second manner is as follows: you make three triangular cauteries on the ankle area according to this form; and do it with good depth.</end_of_turn
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of the toe, and if the cautery is of olive oil or great.</end_of_turn>
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Many people say that the cautery should be made over the middle of the ankle for that there are four cauteries.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circle which precedes the formation of the dislocation of the ankle, which is a continuous circle and burns the spiciness of the whole codena.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the manner of cautery in sciatica when the pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.</end_of_turn
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it extends into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the surface of the thigh over the area where the pain is felt; and one on the hip for four fingers a little beyond the navel.</end_of_turn>
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the cautery is to be repeated, and the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of spiciness of the codena.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the patient reports that the pain extends to the area below the toes, then cauterize here where you made the cautery for three points or four or more if you desire.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the patient reports that the pain is still there despite the previous treatment, then cauterize here with one repeated cautery.</end_of_turn
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And keep this in mind in all cauterizations that you do not finish with the cautery while you burn nerves or great vessels, and that for this reason it is over the patient neither damage nor contraction.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen others who have cauterized on the hip and finished with the cautery, and the limb was so swollen that the tumor reached the foot, and the limb was perforated and corrupted throughout.</end_of_turn
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And give a strong solution of vinegar, and do the same with death.</end_of_turn
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each according to this manner.</end_of_turn
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise people say concerning the cautery of the ankle that the cautery which is like a circle of iron whose circumference is the length of a palm; and be deep enough to reach the marrow according to the thickness of a date seed or less.</end_of_turn
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And draw that circle a third time; and let the space between them be the quantity of the nail of the thumb; and let those circles be closed with two fingers; and let the length of those strokes be a nail or two nails, and make in those grooves of iron properly placed in the circles; and this is the form of them.</end_of_turn
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And let the fire be lit in the firebox until it is covered in smoke and sparks, and let it be covered over the ankle area, the patient resting on his side.</end_of_turn
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so cauterize with three cauteries around in one go.</end_of_turn
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And so keep this for three days; then apply a plaster to the border and leave the wound open for several days; and take care that there is no inflammation until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Doctors say: or, children, of this kind of cautery few have used for the terror of the patient, and for that reason few have found that which please them concerning it.</end_of_turn
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May these burns be applied to those who suffer from it, and find relief at that very place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May the cautery be performed with two circles having an opening pierced in them, through which the fat should be squeezed out like the seeds from a pomegranate; let the length of the incision be as big as two hazelnuts or as many as those seeds.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between their thighs is of such a quantity as to contain the thickness of a finger; cover them with cushions and support them, so that they rest against each other in this way:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand over the ankle and support the limb over the bone, compress your hand over the ankle; take cold water and pour it between two circles, and let the heat gradually decrease. The quality of that should be like that of a small flame. Keep it like that for the quantity of an hour, and endure the pain of the disease and the swelling of the limb — for indeed every other pain is like fire — until the pain ceases.</end_of_turn>
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand towards the instrument and wipe away the cold water from the entire ankle with clean water.</end_of_turn>
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then leave it like that for three days and support the limb until the swelling of the limb has subsided; leave it like that for several days, and when the swelling has gone down; this is the end of the treatment.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those who are suffering from it until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or the hip, make them sit in a position where they can contain water as is done for the ankle swelling.</start_of_turn>
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of cold water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.</start_of_turn
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and caustic not extinguished of both parts, take one part each, grind them and suspend them in a new liquid from which the part remaining is pierced with a small hole according to the quantity that enters into it.</start_of_turn
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then suspend the remaining liquid in another liquid and pour it over that alkali and caustic alive. Take hold of those with the thumb of your hand and compress them well, and see what comes out of the acute water in the limb towards the sent liquid.</start_of_turn
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, and take another live caustic and another renewed alkali, for that every hour that this is not done will cause great acute suffering, which is administered in surgical operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for that operation is like fire.</start_of_turn
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And so of many medicines which are cauterized widely, some are quick and coarse and others are slow and gentle, and caus with sulfur added to them are more effective.</start_of_turn
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And this is the story of an ancient man who underwent an operation for ankle and sciatica pain, and who praised the treatment, saying that no other treatment was necessary, and that he was healed by a mere glance as recommended, for that he recognized that this treatment was of great efficacy.</start_of_turn
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is necessary to have certain herbs green, and if they are not found green, take fresh figs; take some of them crushed with a little gray and apply it to the ankle where the pain is, or in the thigh or hip, and bind it.</start_of_turn
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it on for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the disease allows before the swelling subsides.</start_of_turn
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put it in water and when the limb is inflamed, take it out into the sun, for the pain will cease and it will be healed.</start_of_turn
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Remember that no one should use these medicines without first evacuating the limb.</start_of_turn
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Indeed I say that when a goat has a wound of the vein of the heel that is cauterized, take advantage of that opportunity; and perform the cautery in this manner: take wool and soak it in oil against the cold, and apply it between the toes of the foot and between the heel bones.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dry goat hair and burn it with fire until it is black; then place it on the wool and leave it until it is extended.</start_of_turn
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of pain disappears and the pain is relieved.</start_of_turn
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called cautery of calves.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 52.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	From cautery of pain in two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some veins cause pain in the two limbs due to various causes, such as inflammation or bruising or excessive evacuation, and for such causes, by infusion of hot and wet matter.</end_of_turn>
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And do not burn except in this single kind which is useful for the emission of hot matter.</end_of_turn>
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore cover, immediately evacuate the disease with small pills fixed and similar to them, that they are useful over the two limbs in which the pain is three lines according to their breadth, because if you have to burn in any line or cauterize or massage, according to the quantity that comes from the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the disease.</end_of_turn
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let the cautery be useful with the pointed cautery.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a median claw in this way:</end_of_turn
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol XLI.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From the beginning of the inflammation of the joints.</end_of_turn>
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	These veins cause this disease in small children; and a sign of the beginning of the disease in children is that they cause swelling in their limbs and impede elevation and movement.</end_of_turn
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And others in the rear respond to the two limbs and their bones that already begins to dominate over the other bones.</end_of_turn
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see that it is necessary and you wish to forbid, then cauterize that which is circular according to this form:</end_of_turn
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that it surrounds the cautery over the entire part of the bone equally.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the bone with pointed cautery two lines or three.</end_of_turn
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close together.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And take care of the area inside that it is healthy with that which we have said.</end_of_turn
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Beware that the cautery is not administered in inflammation that is useful for spasm of nerves.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol XLIV.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cautery for gout and joint pain.</end_of_turn
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</end_of_turn
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore gout caused by excessive cold is cured with management and not by remaining idle, for the pain will remain until the cautery is made.</end_of_turn
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And that you cauterize immediately the evacuation in the circuit of the foot bone with more than one cautery.</end_of_turn
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be olive oil in which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.</end_of_turn
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises inside the bones or to the other joints, and when these veins are seen to be swollen, then cauterize that over every painful area with three cauteries or four throughout with this olive oil cautery.</end_of_turn
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more than these cauteries are necessary, then cauterize that and do not burn too much your hand with the cautery before, be it only for the sake of the code.</end_of_turn
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain arises inside the bone and the two limbs, then administer the cautery which we have said in the preceding chapter.</end_of_turn
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the most only place, and is called with swelling, then puncture in the circumference of the bone as if it were a wheel, puncture in those two lines.</end>
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the aforementioned places, then puncture in the circumference of the bones over every bone and over the joint of the hand.</end>
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain is close to the cartilage or the muscles, then cauterize all over the parts of the healers.</end
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the disease well-regulated and with the reception of medicines, for if it is well-regulated and inflamed, it is evacuated with this cautery without any other remedy, God helps.</end>
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Capitol .xlv.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the joints and saying the bones are loosened from the skin towards the genitals, and when this is imminent, then you must order the patient to lie down and use soft cushions so that the wound coming from the belly will stop bleeding.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And immediately follow the patient between your thighs and order them to keep their thighs inside until the wound is closed or the skin or the bones reappear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And immediately return that which is in the bowels and secure the rupture on the fifth bone and signal the limb which appears like a circle from the buttocks to the groin.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And immediately grasp the cautery which is like this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is smooth and gets hair-like bristles.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</start_of_turn>
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And immediately stop the cautery when you put your hand over the sign which is on the hand, and when you have placed it until you see the fifth bone enter the middle of the heel; and repeat this until you have achieved it in the first attempt on the bone.</start_of_turn
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe diligently the color of the intestine during the cautery, that you do not burn that intestine so that there is no death or other great harm to the patient.</start_of_turn
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And remember that when you are performing the cautery you must not touch the bones, do not endanger your operation.</start_of_turn
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And you must take care that the cautery of the children is subtle according to the great and the measure of them.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the area of the cautery for three days with borders until the wound of the fire is healed.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those who are with you until they are healed.</start_of_turn
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should rest on the thighs for forty days until the wound and the swelling are sealed.</start_of_turn
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And you must abstain from food for them according to the length of time of their cure, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.</start_of_turn
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to take them away after forty days, the hour administer them food properly made, and keep them for other forty days.</start_of_turn
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be mindful of work and of the replenishment of food and drink, and of harsh speech, for when you use this regimen of treatment the whole woman will be healed.</start_of_turn
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say the cure of the ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you must not neglect, for when you cauterize the rupture of that which is cauterized round according to the quantity of it, and that which is extruded from the navel up to the third part of it; and take care of that which we have said, and do not adjust.</start_of_turn
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already said that the first ruptures must be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this way, because it is signaled by a touch.</start_of_turn
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is stopped in a line which is as wide as the breadth of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a claw cautery, more the first cautery is more acute and better.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery of torsion.</start_of_turn
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in the limbs due to swelling or percussion and the pain persists for a long time and you do not relieve it with medicine, then you must cauterize with a pointed cautery.</start_of_turn
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery of the whole limb according to the magnitude and the smallness of it, and the hardness and softness of it, and the location of torsion and the pain of it.</start_of_turn
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if you are healed from the first cautery, well; and if not, then you must repeat the cautery; for it is often the case that those pains are that the points of the limb are near that limb, so that you must consider that you can achieve those with the cautery until the patient is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Capital xlvii. - From the cautery of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The books many times cauterize with a great instrument, and indeed if the species of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of fat and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is common or rare and cured by what we have said in the division and do not burn, neither this, and fear over the illness that the corruption comprehends all the body of the patient and all the entirety of it, for when you cauterize it over the head with two cautery instruments: one in the middle of the head, and the second at the back of the head, over the eyebrows; and two over the ears; and one behind, over the nape or servant.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally put your hand over the cautery a a little distance from the bone so that the scales are loosened from it, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize over the belly as much as is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the illness and appears obvious, then it is necessary that you cauterize that with those same cautery instruments which we said on the head; and cauterize over the root of the nose, and two cautery instruments over the two big toes, and two cautery instruments over two vertebrae of the collarbone, and six cautery instruments over the vertebrae of the chest, and one large one over the vertebrae close to the navel, and one over the navel, and two over the ankles, and two over the muscles, and two the nails of the fingers; and cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and over each nail of the fingers and toes, and over the hair of the head.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard yourself from the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And many are cauterized with a cautery instrument over the bone of the thumb and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the heel bone.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that when you adjust many cautery instruments, it is more beneficial and safer; and you know that the illness does not feel pain in the cautery, just as before, for the body is already stupefaied
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And you know that the cautery instruments must be large or small according to the limbs and joints as it precedes the qualities of the instruments
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the cautery with flour of barley and oil and another care that it is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capital xlviii. - From the cautery of wounds of the body
De cauterizacio de stupor.	From the cautery of the stupor of the body
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is stiff or sleeping and is cured with medicines, oils and plasters, and is not healthy, then you cauterize that stiff limb with a cautery instrument as it deserves the greatness of the limb or the smallness of it
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the testicles must be cauterized within the hardness of the testicles a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is in the wound within that it is healthy
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And many are cauterized any stupor which is due to the fingers and toes, and to the vertebrae of the chest and sometimes the sensation of the nerves which are inside that limb, and it is appeased the stupor.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume anything except that which is known in the anatomy of the limb and the exit of the nerves throughout the body
Capitol .xlix.	Capital xlix. - From the cautery of wounds of the head and neck
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	From the cautery of wounds that are rotting
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When wounds are old and do not conform to the touch of the medicines, then you cauterize over that with a cautery instrument a little at a time according to the quantity of the hardness of the wound until the whiteness and the color of it is changed, and the color of it is changed
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that with flour of barley and lentils with olive oil and rue leaves, and columb or heron's blood, give each a part and mix them all together, and put a bandage on it and keep the area still until it is healthy
Capitol .l.	Capital l. - From the cautery of wounds of the head and neck
De cauterizacio de cranc.	From the cautery of the cranium
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to remove that bone, then you cauterize that with a circular cautery instrument around its circumference as it is twisted
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	They say that it is cauterized behind the cautery in the middle area; however, I do not see that here, for I fear that it is ulcerated. Indeed, I have seen several similar cases.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is better that it be cauterized in a circle around the area as we have already said, or at the most with a cautery.
Capitol .li.	End of game.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	From the cauterization of the diseased parts.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any diseased part is delayed in maturation, and this is due either to excessive fatness, or for the state of the disease, which is old in decrepitude, or for lack of strength, or for the time, and you wish to expedite the maturation of the diseased parts; then cauterize in the circumference of them with small punctures; and thus you will make her expedite her maturation.</start_of_turn>
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	However, if you wish to perforate them with the cautery, then do so with the cautery of which this is the form: and stop that in the middle of the diseased parts until you have pierced the membrane.</start_of_turn
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize in that place which is more left, so that the limb of the arm is relieved; and take care of that which is within until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lii.	End of game
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	From the cauterization of the corrodents.</start_of_turn>
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrodent is a wandering corruption in the limb, which consumes that as if with fire it consumes dry wood.</start_of_turn
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if sometimes that corrodent is in the place where you suffer from the cautery with fire, then you must cauterize with fine needles many or few according as is convenient in that place where it is corroding.</start_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And thus cauterize throughout the whole area until you have eradicated the whole corruption and there remains no cause of it.</start_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And thus leave it for three days, and suspend over the cauterized places until three days have passed with olive oil mixed in until the scabs are all eradicated and the whole corruption has gone.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And take care that there be no wound left behind.</start_of_turn
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if after three days the wound does not heal in the place where there is no corruption, it is not so; but if so, then repeat the cautery over that which is still corrupted.</start_of_turn
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And a corrodent is treated in various ways with acute medicine, which is half in the place of cautery.</start_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, fire cautery is of greater utility together with other remedies.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already spoken of the care of them with acute medicine in the division, so take that which you desire of them.</start_of_turn
Capitol .liii.	End of game.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	From the cauterization of nails and of the other like them.</start_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many veins become swollen in the lower part of the foot which is called claw, and this is a great cause, making the foot swell; and it is cauterized in two ways, namely with fire and with lukewarm water.</start_of_turn
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, fire cautery is that you ignite the cautery cautiously resembling punishment, which is made of iron according to the quantity of the claw which you must cauterize throughout, and of fine stripes.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And thus suspend the ignition over the claw, and with the other hand hold your hand over the cautery in the circumference of the claw until the cautery has reached the depth of the claw.</start_of_turn
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until the limb gets well.</start_of_turn
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And thus cover that with coarse salt saved from the fields, and leave the plaster on that for a night, for that will be eradicated from its root.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the place where the nail was generated until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not heal, and many veins swell on the surface of the limb, mainly in the foot and ankle, then you must administer on those cauteries with lukewarm water, that is, take a little piece of lead or iron or punishment and put it on the claw; and pour a little lukewarm water over the piece, and hold your hand over it, and press the margin of the canula against the root of the claw, and keep the lukewarm water away from the root of the claw; and wait for the patient a little while for the biting of the lukewarm water for an hour, and then remove it, for the claw will have been eradicated from its root.</start_of_turn
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus we must make an incision over those and approach the other from within, until we reach all of those which are within the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And thus we must take care that the root of the nails is eradicated with those incisions which the flesh sees engendered.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .liiii.	End of text.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Concerning the cautery of tremors.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is an excessive tremor due to cold in the nerves or from excessive fever, or from another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries or more over the vertebrae of the two, between each vertebra with a cautery; and over the feet of the patient, and over the stomach.</end_of_turn
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides and the health of the feverish patient is restored.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lv.	End of text.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Concerning the cautery of accidental boils on the body.</end_of_turn
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When boils appear on the body, and pus-filled wounds appear which are caused by corrupt thick matter; therefore at the beginning when they appear, it must be cauterized over the head of the fistula with a fine needle and thread, or over the root of the eroding long vessel; or with a slow cautery.</end_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some physicians cauterize immediately at the beginning of their discharge according to this manner; and they do not hesitate, and by breaking up the excess they make them harmless, and heal them from those.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But indeed it must be made with a drain through flebotomy.</end_of_turn
Capitol lvi.	End of text.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Concerning the cautery of a wound of infection caused by an incision of the artery.</end_of_turn
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many physicians must deal with an arterial fistula which arises from the ulcer which must be excised, or from the incision of boils or cautery of the limb, and in such cases it is difficult to close that.</end_of_turn
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when such an accident happens, you must immediately place your hand over the opening of the artery, and pause until blood flow from the wound has ceased, and that no more blood comes out.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And immediately stop the bleeding with fine and coarse cauteries, several in number, and cool over those until they are no longer ignited.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And immediately take from those a little or a great one according to the place and the ulcer from which the artery is broken, over that vein tightly hold back the bleeding until it has been closed and that blood flow has ceased.</end_of_turn
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the wound is extruded from the opening of the artery when you have closed the vein and squeezed the cauteries, then take another cautery immediately alongside the previous ones which are prepared in the fire, and do not cease until the wound is closed.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And take care that you do not burn the nerves that are here, and that you go on to another illness over the patient.</end_of_turn
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you must know that when an artery bursts, it is not possible to restrict the wound, and more so when the artery is large, except for one of four methods: either a cautery as we have said, or an extirpation when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted the limbs are burnt and the wound is closed, or that it is bound with thread or ligature to make a strong structure, or that it is held with medicines which have the property of restricting the wound; and that it is bound with powder or constriction downwards.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But indeed those who administer decent restriction downwards with thread and stricture with cloths or by position of the causes burn rather than comfort.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens when the physician is not present or the medicine is not available, then you must order the opening of that vein immediately as we have said, and understand with great attention the extent of the wound until the wound has completely separated from the ulcer, and that the artery is not clotted; and that over the artery you should sprinkle with cold water of great coldness until the wound is closed and hardened; and indeed do everything that is necessary for the cautery or the medicine.</end_of_turn
Comensa la segonda partida.	(The provided text for the second part is not included in the prompt.)</start_of_turn>
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Concerning incisions and perforations and wounds and phlegmas and their similarities.</end_of_turn
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These words are from Albucazi.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases in which the cautery is convenient and helpful, and the causes and occasions of these, and the instruments necessary for them, are to be set out in their proper order in the following chapters up to and including the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I shall proceed in this chapter concerning that matter which has been requested, so that what is desired may be relieved, as regards that concerning which demand has been made
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And since I am about to speak of it, know that in this chapter is to be feared that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that reason it is necessary to take great care, because in this operation there are many things which may cause evacuation of the intestines or the loosening of the bowels, which is dangerous for life, because of the bursting of a vein or incision on the abscess or opening of an ulcer or emptying of the plague or extraction of a splinter or incision of a stone.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	All these things are accompanied by fear and trembling and in most of them death is imminent.<end_turn>
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you that you should not attempt anything in this matter which is beyond your capacity, for there are many things which may cause you to behave like madmen or like those who are mad with diseases.</start>
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	Therefore, it is better for you to depart from your disease than to die from it, and to help the gentleness of what you find in your disease, and for the length of your disease, and for the fear of the disease which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And these are the things which I have said to you before and will say, hoping for your salvation, and your speedy recovery from your disease.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore you should not consent to anything which is beyond your power; and your caution should be greater than your desire and your presumption about anything should not be made except for that which has certain knowledge which is useful to you and for which you have good reason to believe it will be successful
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all these maladies the prognosis and the indication of them to which health is converted, because in that is to you the helper in the acquisition of fame and glory, of love and praise, and of lasting fame
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God is with you and will teach you and direct you and protect you, for he is in your hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordained this chapter separately from the chapter of cautery, concerning the care of the head up to and including the feet, so that what you desire concerning what you need from what is above and what is below may be relieved
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the care of water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	It is known that this disease is not without danger to children, for it is when the wet nurse opens the head of the child that life is taken from him.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And many times the cause of this is a hidden one which is not known
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease except in children; and in all those whom I have seen it, death has been imminent, and for this reason I have been left desolate in this matter
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and whose head was always so swollen that he could not support himself, even when carried, until he died, and that the moisture increased until death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	Or it is accumulated between the marrow and the bone, or between the bones over the cartilage
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For if the moisture is between the marrow and the bone and the abscess is slight, then you must make a wound in the middle of the head with a fissure two fingers wide, until the moisture runs out, and this is the form of the cautery
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess is large, then two wounds must be made according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the moisture is outside the bones, this is an indication that you have eaten too much of the head and the water is squeezed out when you press with your thumb against the parts around it, and this is not the moisture which is hidden away
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must make three wounds in the middle of the head according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove all the moisture from the incision; and strengthen the wounds with strips and cushions; and pour wine and oil over the wound until the fifth day; and then remove the ligature and care for the wound with sponges and compresses, and strengthen the head equally; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is healed and healthy
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E es otra manera de incisión, que consideras hon la magnitud del apostema y la colección del agua, porque algunas veces la vejez es mayor en el occipicio, o en la parte denante, o en la derecha, o en la izquierda; y por tanto atención a la incisión donde aparece el apostema y la repleción del agua, y fén aquo según que a tú es más posible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	Observe that you must not cut the artery, and that when the blood flows out freely from the wound, it brings relief to the patient by evacuating the humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of the arteries that are close to the heel, these are called hilasse vessels.
Capitol segon.	Chapter III
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are boils or carbuncles on the heel or foot, and it has been a long time, and one does not trust in the healing power of medicines, then the best cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore cover when you want to make the incision so that the patient does not feel pain, and bring a rough sponge to the area to expose the arteries, and strengthen the patient's chest against the pain; and consider where the vein is located.  And the places where any of these are close to the heels depressed, and do not uncover anything except for a few bones.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And do the same with regard to the surrounding area, and make the incision of each part that is acutely painful at the incision to reach the bone, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, you can remove the surrounding tissue and tie off the artery at the incisions of the parts above
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, because when any vein is incised the blood is ejected with a pulsatile flow, which leaps up frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	More if the artery does not appear at the incision, however cover that you measure the heel to determine the amount of space of three fingers, and do the same with regard to the surrounding area, and do this until you reach the bone
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you must gather of the blood is the amount of a thumb and a little finger.<end_turn> and do not take too much or too little, but as much as appears from the virtue of the patient and the replenishment of the artery in them.<end_turn>
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the plague, and therefore if anything remains on the bone of any cause of swelling, then do the incision so that no abscess arises from the cautery.<end_turn
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the swelling with sponges and with silk thread of silk, and care for that which is within until it is healed.<end_turn
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Regarding the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples<end_turn>
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or acute boils or abscesses occur due to agricultural humidity or for the quality of the lacerations of the temples, or so ancient and resembling those, and when these cannot be cured by the methods of medical treatment, then we must resort to the extraction of the arteries in the temples or to the cauterization of those in this way as we have shown.<end_turn
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient should support those that are in the temples; and understand that the artery that appears in the temple is the one that you have shown by the mark, and that it is hidden except for a few bones due to the intensity of the heat.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then strengthen the patient's chest with some support; and bring a rough sponge or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take hold of the sponge in this way:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And you grasp the thumb with your thumb and index finger and grasp the skin with your middle and ring fingers, and extract that which is above until you extract that from the heel and uncover that from the tunic which is left behind, from all parts.<end_turn
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	And if the artery is small, then you wrap that around the end of the toe, and make an incision of that part according to the extent to which the toes are swollen and contracted, and do not cut the blood supply, for if it is not cut it will not cure the blood of all the parts.<end_turn
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And evacuate blood from the thumb and a little finger. End of book.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the wound is large, it is necessary to ligate it in two places with strong silk or strong thread, and do not close it up until the pus has dried up and the wound has consolidated.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And immediately reduce the excess which is between two ligaments; and do so at that moment or at another convenient time.</end_of_turn>
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that which is within the bone within the bone cavity before the extremities are incisions are made, and stop that work in place of that matter.</end_of_turn>
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better work when the patient has a fever or is suffering from scalded complexion; because the cautery is of those causes which aid the drying humors, and therefore is better in judgment.</end_of_turn
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Cover also the extraction of the arteries that you see in the place of the old wound, and keep them covered with fine powder adequately made, and do so either with herbs or dry medicines which cause the flesh to swell and become soft until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another one sees the flow of blood from the artery, then in that hour you must restrict that blood, or the cautery, or that which fills the wound, and hold your hand over that place until the bleeding is stopped.</end_of_turn
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for no other reason you are not present, then suspend the bleeding from the wound until the blood has congealed, and cover the wound with lukewarm water until the acute pain has ceased, and strengthen as much as you can.</end_of_turn
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more curious in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein at this point having two hooks, because you have marked the two places at the attempt, and you have stopped any other, except for fire, until the bone is reached and the vein is divided in two places, so that it is elongated what is between the extremities of them, which are not consolidated at all by this cautery.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:</end_turn
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two hooks is equal.</end_turn
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	More importantly, if their sharpness is less than two hooks, it is better, because if their sharpness is too great near any part of the body, it will burn the flesh too quickly.</end_of_turn
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickness, keep the fire's heat in those places and the flesh will be gently separated.</end_of_turn
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in all work and lighter.</end_of_turn
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two hooks is the quantity of the thickness of the finger.</end_of_turn
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the care of the limbs affected by the acute and acid humors of the bones.</end_of_turn
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the humors are acid, and the veins which are above the head of the tibia are affected, do not consult for any reason about the treatment of medicine, for the face of the patient will already be swollen and will be sitting in the chair like ants, and the bones of that limb will be extended, softened more than they were known to be, and the nails will be scaled by the sharpness of the tears, which is an old custom in the treatment of these operations, and now that treatment is done without space.</end_of_turn
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise his knees towards you, and immediately make three incisions equally distant according to the length of the face.</end>
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the face, and the second according to the length a little bit below the tear ducts, and the third at the other end.</end_of_turn
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard yourself from the cutting of the arteries which are in two places, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.</end_of_turn
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.</end_of_turn
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth moistened with these which you will use to absorb the blood.</end_of_turn
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And immediately between the two sharp extremities, this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the root of the temples to the second incision.</end_of_turn>
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise at that whole the cord which is between two incisions over the bone, and do so with the point which is over the bone in the middle of the incision.</end_of_turn
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And so, after having scraped this space and having put in the first incision, another instrument is introduced, which is called the cutellar, blunt at one end and sharp at the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then stop the flow of blood from that blunt end towards the fatty part, and the blood from the loin does not reach the bone.  Close up that which has reached the middle fissure, and ligate all the blood vessels that go down from the head to the feet
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Maybe the incision should be continued until after the loin, and so make the other incision in the middle fissure enter the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the amount is sufficient has gone out, press the parts of the body of the patient with a cloth.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And so stop in any old wound of the knee, and stop over those dusts covered in oil and vinegar and oil agar, which must not be left behind after the cautery.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the ligament and administer a great effusion of cold or tepid water, and so care that there is ointment of beeswax with olive oil and other things that the wounds may be healed
Capitol .v.	End of document.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	The care of the eyes for the care of the limbs descends from the parts around the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When to some extent of acute catarrh continues, and sometimes the limbs of the patient extend little, and already with regard to them it is necessary to take care, ulcers appear on the eyelids and their edges become rough, and in the front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent vomiting, the hours of greatest danger for these accidents are when the matter and the catarrh do not descend from the veins of the parts surrounding the head
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best care for these is this: that you order the patient to rest his front, and so make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a little for the width (and begin with the incision at the left temporal vein going to the right temporal vein; and let the incision be inside the bone; and lengthen your hand from the lacerations of the temples which are bitten by the chewing).
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Drain all the blood with sponges or dry gauze and so fill between the two lips of the incision with wax or cloth of lead
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And so keep away from the wound with dust covered in oil and vinegar to prevent it from leaving behind after the cautery
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have drained it and you see that the swelling has already diminished, the hour is that you should harden the bones until they begin to yield, and so care for that which regulates the evacuation which makes the bone yield as if you took from flour two parts and from barley four parts and mixed them, or like that make plaster and administer it to these wounds of the newly born bone
Capitol .vi.	End of document
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	The care of that which is in the ankles.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause which comes to be in the ankles is of four kinds, either mineral stone or that which seems like stone, such as iron and ivory, or that which is of plant origin such as thistle or bean, or that which is due to flux, such as vinegar and oil agar or something similar
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when the stone comes to be in the ankle or any other cause similar to these does not adjust or does not grow in the ankle, and stops the ankle from the sun, and if sometimes the stone is ejected in any of these causes of oil and vinegar or something similar, and so administer the extraction of it, and make it vomit with condiment, and pack the wound from the event of vomiting.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And so stop in the circumference of the ankle some parts of fat or bandage, and extend the ankle to the parts above, because the matters which are swollen are forceless with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not forceless, the hour administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtle of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is swollen with the thumb, well; and if not, the hour administer the extraction of it with an instrument of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not swollen by this, the hour make a canula of gutta and insert the extremity of the canula into the cavity of the ankle and close around the canula with wax and oiled material to prevent it from being torn except for the canula itself
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And so extract with the belly well drawn with great attraction, because strong matters which have been mentioned are seen.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Maybe if it is not swollen in this way, the hour takes hold of the limb with a cold or wet cloth which has been taken from the armpit, and places it on the extremity of the ray, and so covers over that part conveniently stopped
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And thus we draw out the one in the ankle with ease, and expel the ankle from the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not necessary for all of the causes which we have mentioned, then you should restrain the one biting or spitting that is causing the pain of apostema, whether from cautery or spasm.</end_of_turn>
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to treat that is to touch the patient’s pulse and extract the cause according to the virtue of the parts, and thus do that which causes the fissure between the bones of the ankle to appear, and make a small incision in the heel of the ankle where the bone is black and soft.</end_of_turn>
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fracture is of a crescent shape until it reaches the heel, and the heel is grasped, hold that if possible with appropriate instruments; and do so with speed, and care that it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the ankle is one of the humors that grows and inflates, then administer the antidote and extract it; even if you do not obey my orders precisely, take some sponge from this way:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer that which is the abscission of that humor which is causing the pain in the ankle.</end_of_turn>
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not delay when you think that one has already been moistened by the vapor of the ankle, and keep it in soft parts, and thus expel it from those with nails or with a sponge, or as we have said, relief is found in the expulsion of it.</end_of_turn>
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the ankle, use that the patient should perform a sternutation at the beginning, and fill the ankle with a little bit of old cloth, and place your hand over that ankle in which the water is, and if by this means the pain is not expelled, it is not necessary; but if not, take hold of the patient’s toes and knees according to the length of the finger, and clench them in the fire for a while, and the patient put one of those in the opening of the ankle and jumps on the other foot beside that limb and strikes with the other foot on the foot that is causing the ankle to bend.</end_of_turn>
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop until all the water has been expelled.</end_of_turn>
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And indeed when the water has been expelled in this way, take paper or sponge.</end_of_turn And put one extremity in the ankle and extend the other extremity in the fire until the majority of it is burned.</end_of_turn
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And thus put on another sponge and do so until all the water has been expelled, and draw out that which is said to be the external bone.</end_of_turn
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of the beast that enters that ankle, if it is little, do so with care and hold it still, as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes fear of immediate damage, then administer the extraction with nails and nails, and the cause of the pain is less severe than all the other causes that cause pain in the ankle.</end_of_turn
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms that are engendered in the ankle, when you have cured that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and you do not suffer the antidote, then you must cover the ankle with the sun.</end_of_turn
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if any cause of the worms appears, then extract that with nails or fine nails, even if no cause appears, then take a needle from behind and pull it wide open from which this is the shape of them.</end_of_turn
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And draw out the limb slightly from the ankle according to the quantity that the pain suffers; and thus apply pressure with that which is useful for pressure, and do so until all the worms have been expelled.</end_of_turn
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey my orders precisely, then take hold and close the hole of the needle as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proved useful in the cure of worms, and find out in the treatise on distillations.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be your effusion with which oily medicines are applied to the ankle with this instrument of which this is the shape.</end_of_turn
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And do so with silver or lead, from behind, with a small hole, and put on the palm of your hand.</end_of_turn
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus be as when you are grasping the circumference of the needle here where it is necessary.</end_of_turn
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the sponge and wrap it around the limb adequately with a coat, and pour oil into the hollow of the limb, or juice of any herb, or whatever you wish of these medicines in the needle – and that is in the ankle – and then draw out the sponge with your hand and press with your hand that which is the temper of the limb until the oil has been expelled from the hollow of the limb and the pain has ceased to feel the oil within.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is infiltrated in the heel has already been scorched with fire for a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Keep in mind that the cause which you will distill in the heel should not be too hot, because the medicines for the heel do not tolerate it.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .vii.	(The text continues with several lines of medical advice, but the provided portion does not contain any further translation.)</end_of_turn>
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Care for the ointment of the heel.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some mothers of children who have eaten large amounts of food without perforating their bellies, and that which has already happened to some men, should be oiled in the meat of the heel for the plague or for nothing in particular; and this oiling of some is useful in the preon of the heel which does not succeed at once, and some in the outer parts.</end_of_turn
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the preon of the heel, which does not succeed at once, is in the greatest degree of difficult healing.</end_of_turn
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that in which you succeed at once, cover that you stop the heel of the patient towards the sunlight and rest in that.</end_of_turn
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if sometimes the ointment appears, open that which is the cause of it, which is the fine sand from which this is made.</end_of_turn
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the limb in which it is small is of which one part is acute and the other not; and the sand is of two lions so that it does not make a wound in the heel.</end_of_turn
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the ointment is for nothing born in the heel or in the meat of the limb, then do so with those sharp nails and prick that with great ease until all the meat is gone.</end_of_turn
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the ointment is in the preon of the heel, then take fine sand from a lion and burn that little fire, and then put that in the meat of the heel.</end_of_turn
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you smell ointment in that with which the patient finds it easier, for gravity to help, try to press the oppression of it easily; and keep in mind that you do not touch the nerves of the heel.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And thus leave the heel covered with lint according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound which you have enveloped in Egyptian unguent; and do this for several days until you are certain of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some and bury that under vinegar and powder over it and use it; and if sometimes the heel has already become softened, then cover that which you have taken out and replace it with another which you will cover in fat that is useful for oil rubbing, until the swelling has gone down; and then care for it until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Or if there is a flux of pus, then immerse sponges or cloth in cold water and put them on the heel, and use another remedy which restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.</end_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	(The text continues with several lines of medical advice, but the provided portion does not contain any further translation.)</end_of_turn
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Care for the paleness which is caused by the eyes.</end_of_turn
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The paleness which is caused by the eyes of the heels is sometimes moist, and sometimes dry.</end_of_turn
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore keep those which have nails or claws, and burn those which have hair or bristles, and quickly stop on the places where you have scratched.</end>
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Or if there is pain with a flux of pus, then you cauterize those which are like lancets on the surface.</end_of_turn>
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the incisions and troops go away when any cause of those bristles has gone away; and when they are cauterized with fire, those bristles are consumed and do not return.</end_of_turn
Capitol .ix.	(The text continues with several lines of medical advice, but the provided portion does not contain any further translation.)</end_of_turn
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care for great swelling which occurs in the eyes of the heels.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many causes arise in the eyes of the heels which are assembled to cause swelling in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called great swelling.</end_of_turn
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the inner eyelid and outside.</end_of_turn
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation in them is that you consider whether the swelling is due to the inward part of the eye and is widespread throughout; and the cause is light.</end_of_turn
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, perform a flank incision over that fissure for the width, and then drain that from all parts easily as it escapes, and suspend that which remains once the other has gone.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the incision is not properly performed, or if you penetrate too deeply at once, it is possible that you will cause no damage at all.</end_of_turn>
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the figure is large, adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is small, do not be excessive in that which may aggravate it; restore the limb and leave it be cured.</end_of_turn
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the greatness is declining at the edge of the wound, you must stretch the wound; then remove the greatness entirely, suspend it once more, since if you have cut too deeply, you will not cause any damage.</end_of_turn
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then close the incision, wash the area with saltwater; and care for the area until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .x.	End of text.</start_of_turn>
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The care of the wound is complete after the washing of the wound area.</start_of_turn
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Grayness is generated in the tunics of the wound from the children, more so in the young, because they cause the hair to fall out and darken it; and it does not prevent the brilliance of the sun because the fat covers them.</start_of_turn
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore, at times those who are working on the faces do so at all times, and over the faces they sleep; and over their faces they leave their eyebrows wet, which have already covered the inflammation, and the imminent appearance of swelling is on the heel; and that when you press the area with your thumb, you will find swelling within them.</start_of_turn
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Every manner of operating is in that in which the physician suspends the patient’s head over the belly and grasps his limbs and makes a circle according to the amount of air contained throughout, and suspends that which is above and presses on the thumb of the area to bring about an increase in swelling in the middle of the circle, and then performs the flank incision over that moisture which has descended from the surface of the wound for the width, and the incision is not to be greater than the incision which is made in phlegm.</start_of_turn
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Therefore, before you complete the incision, that you should have made the swelling throughout reach the swelling, because in the meantime there proceeds swelling of the wound according to the shape of white fat.</start_of_turn
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that which you have enveloped with the draps between the thumbs and index fingers and rotate between the right and left hands until it is dispersed.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And take care that you do not press too tightly in the incision so that the moisture does not reach the wound and remove the covering.</start_of_turn
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see the swelling appear at the beginning of the incision, nevertheless, press in the incision a little to facilitate the swelling; and then extract that which we have said; and then cover with a wet cloth and vinegar and place over the area and remove those which are like dust.</start_of_turn
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so when it is necessary to drain pus from the wound, place it in the concavity of the incision so that what remains of that moisture is absorbed.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If in the area around the wound there is pus after the cautery, care for that with absorbent dressings until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xi.	End of treatise.</start_of_turn>
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of wound care.</start_of_turn
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyes of the patients the natural tears are born from the adjustment of the eyebrows, then these cause the eyes to water and make various methods of illness appear, such as excessive tears and the softening of the eyebrows and the loosening of the membrane until such time as that which is the cause of the destruction of the eye which is called the tarsus, and care must be taken in four ways: by cautery of the focus; or by acute medicine as is said in the chapter of cautery; or by the application of an astringent for incision and suture; or by cannas as I will say.</start_of_turn
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you must suspend the patient’s head over the belly; convert the thumb of the right hand to your left hand, and if converted, it is not so; otherwise, insert the needle into that place where it is firm from the part of the pus which is left from the eyebrow, and when you have pierced it put your thumb over the part where the tears are born, and convert that which is above into the ray.</start_of_turn
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	The point of the needle should be inserted at the outer corner of the eye, where the lacrimal gland meets the tear duct; then extract the needle and leave a small amount of soot or ash on the eyelid, and press gently over the eye with your thumb, like a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it must be known that the degree of swelling of the eyelid varies between individuals, so that some people require that the larger part of the tear duct be injected according to the degree of swelling.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And thus perform the operation at the place where you have marked the two lines, starting from the major tear duct into the minor one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the wound is deep like that of a royal beard.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the sponge on one of the two corners of the wound, then remove the whole thing, and with the thumb and index finger of the other hand grasp the two lips and pull them towards the gut or toward the thread, and pull out the intestines, and if you wish, sew up what remains of the intestines over two eyelashes with various stitches, or leave it open as it is.</end_turn>
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And remove the stitches from the intestines within three or four days, and take care of the wound.</end_turn>
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, leave the wound open and suture, and take care of it as before, because the swelling of the eyelid is alleviated by the closure of the wound and the adhesion of the edges; in this way there is less need to taxanize.</end_turn
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in this case it is more urgent to address the patient's suffering, and it is a good operation, so do not be afraid.</end_turn
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Another way of tying is to make a sign on the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, and to raise the eyelid with three fingers spread apart and gathered together in this way:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If this is not possible, take hold of the nails, and if they are not blunt, take a needle with a thread and pass the thread through the middle of the sign, and pass the other thread alongside the major tear duct, and the thread alongside the minor tear duct, and adjust between the two threads mentioned above so that they are equal, and then place your hand over the area and elevate the whole wound as much as possible, as we have recommended.</end_turn><end_turn>
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for the wound until it is healed.</end_turn><end_turn>
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If after this there should happen to be swelling beyond the wound or the incision, do not be afraid of it, but keep it moistened and clean, and apply ointment.</end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Every herb that is applied to the eyelid that has become sensitive from the wound should be discontinued, because in this case it is better to use what we have already mentioned regarding the wound; in this way there is less need for stitching.</end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxanizing in this way is like this:</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you convert the eyelid and split the sign that is inside as I have described; and then make two needles or two fine pins whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of the sponge.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already pierced at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some slight thickness under the excess of the eyelid above, and tighten the pins of each part with great strength, and leave it like that for several days, because the wound will be very painful and will swell, and will probably fall out by itself as soon as it has been tightened.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is late, break the stitches at the root of the eyelashes, and care for the wound until it is healed.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And thus when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the nails do not penetrate.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is the way to make two needles like this:</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And there is the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.</start_turn>
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the elevation of the nails in the eye when the skin is tough.</start_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn><end_turn>
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the cause of the pain is unnatural, such as harsh and biting cold, and when the patient cries out due to the pain, it is appropriate to take an awl and pierce the flesh at the navel or below the navel, and immediately seize the extremities so that they do not move in an unnatural way.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the incision should be as great as the breadth of a palm
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And immediately take two other awls and leave them in their place briefly, and do not touch the extremities of the patient if you wish to do so
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then hold the patient's head in the groin, and let the sun be your witness so that your work will be declared, for it is a subtle and minor operation
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle at the root of the hair adjusted as necessary, and make that penetrate the skin rapidly until you have extracted the foreign matter from the natural hair
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then draw out the hair together and insert it into an ointment, and keep it there for a few moments, up to three but no more
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then draw your hand over that which has been left behind until the hair is completely expelled with the ointment in the skin of the natural hair
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	More ointment can be applied outside than that which has been applied inside, but do not remove the hair until the ointment has been thoroughly absorbed through the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And when the physician has observed the color of the wound, when the ointment has been applied and the pain has subsided, and when the patient cries out with a groan or cough, let the wound be closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres to the skin and grows out again naturally
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is finer than that which is natural, then adjust a hair of a similar length, and elevate it as such, or that you leave it until it has grown out to an equal extent, and when it has grown out, elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the care of the wound which appears in the eye socket
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye is irritated, and the eyelid is contracted when it is stretched to the right or to the left, because of bad consolidation of pus or of a wound or of a burn, and is called leporine, and this can be either natural or accidental, and is useful for consolidating pus or wounds or burns, or for preventing them from becoming worse
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner in which to perform the operation is that you make that consolidation and separate the eyelids, and place in them a little piece of lead, and bind them until they are healed
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not neglect to apply care to the wound from the causes which cause it, because if you do the pus will return more fiercely than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in these cases something that softens, such as fennel, and soak in the water in which they are placed, or ointment of aloe, which is liquefied with some oil, and immerse in that the lead, and care for that
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasure of your care is that you perforate with all skill that is not consolidated in the manner that we formerly did at the beginning
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned, is nothing other than the rectification of the leporine that does not restore the shape of the eye socket as it was before
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the care of the wound which is useful in the outer part of the eye socket
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	The wound which is useful in the outer part of the eye socket is called vertadierament, and is either natural or accidental
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More often it is useful for pus or for a wound or for a burn or for other things of that kind
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The way to perform the operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and leave that in the flesh, and pass the thread from the left lacrimal sac to the right lacrimal sac, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And immediately extend the flesh around the needle with the needle and hold that with the needle, and make an incision at a sufficient distance from the needle
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Therefore if you restore the figure of the eye socket as it should be, it is well done; but if not, take hold of the thread and stop that in the indented figure, and from that convert the eye socket, and make the two incisions on the side of the outer eye socket.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the two extremities of the two incisions are at two angles of the incision, which has been made so that when they meet together they form a perfect figure
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	The figure depicted is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then keep the amount that is in the guts outside of them, so that the pressure is relieved from the pupil
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then tighten the separated parts and keep those along the thread of silk; and take care of those as we said of the mollifying medicines and the calamus within which must be health
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it be necessary to suture for a wound or cautery or puncture, then cover that the wound is made flat over the margin of the pupil as it is said before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the cloth between two lips as it has been said
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the words of the care of the alxacrati when it is detached or left, that it runs in its operation, according as it is prepared in the manner of alxacrati, and that is in the manner of diverse masses.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artists always prepare an engine in any way possible so that it makes return the figure to its natural form, or in that way, and that disease according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the greatest disposal
Capitol .xv.	End of document
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adherence of the pupil to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When these adhesion happen among many people it is necessary to solidify the pupil more detached from the limb of the pupil, and to prevent the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore cover that you remove the emission of rays from the pupil, and raise it up, or extend it with the nail
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And immediately touch the adhesion with soft sponge, which is not of the sharpness of the incisions, having made obtuse a small hole so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and keep the sponge so that it does not dry out the pupil in its sharpness
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it does not irritate that adhesion until the pupil is returned to its natural form and that the adhesion is completely healed
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And put on the pupil salt water in which you wash; or distill from it vinegar dissolved in water
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And separate between the pupil and the pupil by a piece of cloth of linen, and rest on the pupil a thread of gauze infused with alum, and use three times daily cataplastics until it is healed
Capitol .xvi.	End of document
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of the nail and the emergence of the glands of tears
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two manners, either it is nervous, and it is similar to a hard soft sponge; or it is non-nervous, similar to white moisture solidified, which when you touch it, or force it to take it with the nail, it breaks and the nail is not fixed in it
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not begin until from the greater lacrimal until it gradually covers the sight and prevents the light and the movement of the pupil
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of working in the incision of these is that the patient should keep their head bowed over the abdomen, and put their hands on the pupils, and raise the pupil with your hand, and collect the nail with the nail of little duplication and extend that to the surrounding area
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And immediately take a needle and enter into that a piece of horsehair or of barley or of beef or of something similar, or of strong thread, or gradually double the extremity of the needle and put that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and tie with thread the nail; and extend that to the surrounding area, and scrape with the skin the side of the nail which if necessary will cause the pupil to dilate
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus keep that which is behind inside outwards
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And immediately touch the incision with soft sponge or with small forceps, and leave the natural secretion of the lacrimal so that by incision of that no water of tears flows continuously
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is extended with the natural nail or with thread, as we have said, and immediately make it protrude with sponge of which this is the form of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Beware that on the sponge do not touch the corneal membrane and that you avoid breaking it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Immediately put on the pupil a little salt or ointment to make it slippery, and leave that in for a while; and take care of that which covers within that it is not dry until it is healed
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not sensitive and cannot tolerate the needle, nor if it is deeply embedded in that area, then in such cases the doctor should use medicines to cure this kind of nail, and it is healed in the same way as before and is recommended in division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to cut it out, then open the wound of the patient and take a small piece of sponge moistened with alcohol according to this method:
am subtilitat.	with moderation.</start_of_turn>
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes that is rare and is hidden and comes in that way, then let the doctor distill from your wound in the smell of the head to make it secrete or make it weep or sprinkle salt, and let the smell go into the other day.</start_of_turn>
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat over that operation until all that is of it is gone, except that the after-burn remains. Let the doctor then learn that, and cure the after-burn at the beginning so that it is healed.</start_of_turn
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation about that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharge of the tear duct, if you notice it in the wound for a long time, suspend it with oil; and prick that one out of that part, and do not finish the incision so that no pus flows from the tears.</start_of_turn
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And let it distill in the tear duct head to make it secrete until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn>
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of some herbs and of what is born of a plant adjusted in the wound.</start_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some herbs that grow on the hills are born of a rough plant, and it is over-seated until it covers the pupil, or approaches or expands over the eyelids and tightens the eyelids against the eyelashes and is gathered like a cushion.</start_of_turn
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation on them be that the patient suspends his head in the belly if necessary; and then open the parts of that and collect all that rough plant with oil convenient to the wound, and take oil with a forceps or a basket; and then prick the rough plant at the beginning until all is finished with the incision, and keep you from bleeding that part of your operation.</start_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be like that in which we have recommended to prick the nail, or with small forceps with which it is collected together as it will come in this chapter.</start_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore when the incision is complete and all that rough plant is removed, then let the doctor fill the wound with powdered salt, or let it drip in powder form and resemble the corrosive medicines, and keep it covered with a bandage of wool until it is sure that the after-burn is gone.</start_of_turn
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains any cause of herbs and it is overcome with great care, and you fear after-burn, then let the doctor learn the wound and care for that after-burn with oil until that after-burn disappears, and repeat over that until it is healed, and do the same with the rough plant that happened in this kind of wound.</start_of_turn
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must know that all the care of the head wound by nature or by chance, or by iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of hair in the wound.</start_of_turn
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Hairy veins that are seen on the wound are to be treated with care, and it is forbidden for the patient to move for a certain number of days.</start_of_turn
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the hair in which the wound is strong and in which there is no other disease of hair, then collect that hair.</start_of_turn
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And command the patient to suspend his head in the belly if necessary, and then suspend those veins with an oil or two as you please; and let that oil be doubled in duplication according to this method:</start_of_turn
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two oils gradually in a vessel according to this method:</start_of_turn
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be collected with fine forceps, with moderation, and take away the skin hour by hour, until all those veins are removed from the wound and are relaxed.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And keep that you do not bleed the wound at the extremities of the sponge; and if your operation is in the morning before sunset, and if you stay firm in your operation that you do not prick anything except those veins.</start_of_turn
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed your preparations, then you will release the patient's head downwards or towards the heel so that you can assess the degree of their pain.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Even if this is not possible at this moment, and you place all your attention on what causes their pain, and read them for a few days until the pain has subsided and the cause of the pain is identified and secured with cautery.</end_of_turn>
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this procedure until the patient is healed.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how the forceps are used:</end_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_of_turn>
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of hernias to the navel.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with cautery or with acute medicine, according to what is narrated previously and is not healed, then do not be ashamed to make an incision on their apostema in order to extract the maturity of the hernia, and extract all the moisture that is in it until the bone is revealed.</end_of_turn
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is revealed and sometimes in its corruption or blackness, then you should grasp it with this instrument:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called an asper grasp, which is made without handles, and the head is round like a nail, pierced with five or six punctures of lime or with fine punctures (as it is in the following form).</end_of_turn
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And hold that over the corrupted part of the bone, and rotate that between the thighs mentioned, and press your small hand gently until you know that that corruption is gone.</end_of_turn
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And when all this is done, restore the limb with desiccant and astringent causes.</end_of_turn
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the limb is consolidated and there is good flesh in it, and the belly of the wound is separated from the body for forty days, and it is not renewed or apostematized and there is no accident in it, then you know that it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	Otherwise, do not be ashamed to reduce the wound to the shape of the navel, and according to this method: if you discover it with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is revealed, then grasp it according to this method:</end_of_turn
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The handle of the instrument is triangular, and the head is first extended towards the limb as sometimes happens.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And hold that over the bone, and take hold of the lacrimal; extend your hand a little of the way, and rotate your hand towards the grasp until you have grasped the whole bone, and you will know that you have grasped it well when you feel the pain disappear as soon as you remove your hand.</end_of_turn
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the limb with astringent and desiccant medications like this.</end_of_turn
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the limb are hardened, the matter which flowed outwards from the wound returns to the navel, so that this is more curious about the pain.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.</end_of_turn
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the head.</end_of_turn
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the head swells completely and does not occur at night or diminish, then you must loosen the pain and follow it, and keep the patient calm and still; and put on the head liniment which is made of beeswax, aloe, vinegar and ochre, and apply a thick layer of plaster on the head with powder.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powder is that you take lion's mane cloths and fold each one in four; and make powder from these cloths.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And apply them one on top of the other according to the amount of which the head requires.</end>
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And keep them firm over those with strong and strict structure; and repeat the incisions with pressure; and prevent the patient from vomiting, and let the head rest straight day and night.</end_of_turn
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Even if the ligament is softened, you must keep it straight.</end_of_turn>
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And prevent the ligament from slipping day and night as we have said.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the head has already been reduced, yes, and if not, repeat the plaster with the powder and the structure and the incisions until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the initiation of the eminence of the outer tunic
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the outer tunic, and it is prominent and proceeds outside the eyelashes like a barleycorn, and it is necessary to remove it, it is recommended that you enter the needle at the radix of the outer tunic from the outside inwards, and then put the needle back in the place where there is a double fold of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and loosen the first needle according to its situation; and then insert the needle into the place of the double fold and bring that part of the outer tunic into the circuit of the needle, and tighten that knot.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and rest upon the bloody lanula infused in albumin of blood and loosen until the thread comes out at the root of the hair.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the blood vessel so that it be comfortable when the wound is healed
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Several veins gather together throughout the circumference of the wound within the vicinity of the prominent eminence, and when they are perforated with the sharp instrument that comes to the head of the wound, the albuminous moisture runs out, and the wound descends and enters quickly
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And tighten until it is healed
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the care of aloes
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called aloes is nothing other than a wound which is adjusted in the blood vessel resembling descending water and is not like that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	More diligently work on it so that the patient does not become more swollen and painful on the part affected, and take hold of his head with your two hands when you see the wound becoming healed towards the lower parts, and keep it dry and do not let it descend, and keep your hand over it, so that the patient may see the causes of the wound just as before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downwards, it is because it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	More if it is not prepared to descend downwards with the water as we have said, however, the patient does suffer between the palms of his hands and the patient takes hold of a pointed cautery and puts it on that part above the nail of the thumb where the conjunctiva meets the cornea in the circle (in the middle of the eye), until the wound is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore when it is expelled, then you distill in the blood vessel cold water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And keep it treated with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the care of the descending water of the blood vessel.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said concerning the species of water in the division and what is necessary to perforate with certainty, however
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You must keep the patient still between the palms of your hands over the swelling and hold the blood vessel steady.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then rest your left hand on the lower eyelid if the blood vessel is on the left; or with your right hand if it is on the right
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take the sponge, if the blood vessel is on the left; or with your left hand if it is on the right
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And keep the extremity of the sponge towards the crown for the thickness of the iris in the albumin of the blood from the part of the lacrimal gland, and gently press the sponge against the wound and rotate your hand over it
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the blood vessel and sit that the sponge has already reached its purpose because of its weight
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Keep that the measure of the sponge from the preon is equal to the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black spot, that is the crown of the eye; so that you may see through that pupil with the vision of the eye for the clarity of the corneal tunicle.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then withdraw the sponge from the place where the water is, and put another sponge under it immediately, so that if the water descends too much, the patient will see the wound so much covered by it that it will blind him, and the sponge in the blood vessel.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And rest a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then immediately take away that other sponge which you put under the sponge which has been expelled.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Therefore, when the weather is dry and warm, extract the bile easily with some facility, and mix a little of pure salt with some vinegar and at the same time wash the area with lukewarm water; then wipe away the bile with a cloth or bandage of wool and oil, and wash with the water again.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	More recently, we have seen these things happen in our time, resting upon those who suffer from such indigestion with oil of poppy seed.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your bile when it enters the belly because of its hardness — which is the case with many men of whom the bile is very thick —, then you must take a sponge which is called " alberid" in this way:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore, pierce at that junction there, and do not touch your hand to the wound, otherwise you will make the bile go astray from its natural course.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then bring out the bile as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must congratulate them on their work, whether they are prepared to sleep in the patient's bed downstairs or are prohibited from any movement
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Stay away from the patient's nature so that their nature may be calm, and do not move their seat forward or backward at all
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And keep them quiet according to their condition for the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And remove that person from that gloomy bed and expose the cold air, and let them see some causes, and then return the liament within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Do not do anything in the hour of care or at any other time related to the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Indeed, you must keep the water away from them so that it does not cause them to become excited and aggressive towards you on account of their great and fierce hunger.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If, however, the vomiting persists, you must remove the bile by the seventh day, and correct that which is responsible for the vomiting
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then withdraw from their sight and rest your hands on their oral face for which reason you must keep them quiet for a few days, as they exist in the gloomy bed
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually remove from that bed and converse with them about their causes
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you must know that in no way is it permitted for the disciple of vision to see anything of those things, and you must be careful about the operation
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already been reported to us by some of those who have seen the Lord that when the water is sucked out of the bladder through the opening made by the perforation, the water comes out with great force.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Indeed, however, we have not seen anything like this in our land, nor have we read of it in the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is a new thing.</start_turn>
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the magpies which are about those who do not know about those things:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are fatuous either with regard to their humors or with regard to their parts, and they emit these things in this triangular form which has a sharp point like that which is the shape of a wound.</start_turn
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXV.</start_turn>
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the care of the flesh nothing is in its nature.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various meats in the body which are adjusted to each other, of which there is some cause which is like a scorpion's head with teeth, or like a multitude of fish; this disease is called "polypus" which is like that fish represented.</start_turn><end_turn>
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is like cancer of the flesh, ulcerous, of pale color; and it is like the flesh of a lion not of pale color.</start_turn><end_turn
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is like these lion's meats which are neither fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient lie down between your thighs and place him in the sun, uncover his parts, and prick his belly once in those meats.</start_turn><end_turn
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the parts, and then infiltrate the water which you have understood from those things until you know that all the flesh is already consumed; for if there remains any cause from which the opening is possible, then you must retreat the water with one of the subtle instruments with facility until there remains no cause.</start_turn><end_turn
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Indeed, if the Lord wills or if vomiting persists, then you must stop giving the water; or if it is malignant vomiting, you must cover it up and cauterize that until it is separated from the soul and all the cavities are closed.</start_turn><end_turn
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And immediately take hold of the nose, close the opening of the vein with vinegar or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is congested and there is moisture inside the palate, it is known that it is already healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is no pus in the pores of the nose, which is what causes the swelling.</end_of_turn>
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore you must enter firmly with your hand into the cavity of the nose, without moving the nose, and wait a while until the bleeding stops.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	When the bleeding has stopped, that is when you should smell inside the nose to see if the blood has drained from the nose's channels, and once it is gone, take away the handkerchief that was placed there. Note that children often faint from this action, and this is a light cause of it.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then take away both hands from the nose, one that comes out and the other that remains in the nose, and immediately apply cold compresses to the nose, holding them there until you see that the bleeding has stopped.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the blood, and close the nose immediately by pressing with the thumb against the bone, and do this for three days or more until the wound has healed.</end_of_turn>
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, insert a lead cannula into the nose to prevent bleeding for several days until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you take care of the treatment, use this remedy.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for capturing the maker of the ointment that is distilled with oils and medicines in the nose.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	It is made of silver or gold, which is similar to a small lamp with a wick, as thick as a nail, and the head is similar.</end_of_turn
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	Or make a closed cannula like a tube, and the cannula of the capturing instrument maker is flat, uncovered; to which you must attach the thumb of your hand, which you must hold when you extract the oil or water from the suckers and causes.</end_of_turn
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This ointment is precious: a recipe of castor oil, white balam, ginger, saffron peel, long pepper, mastic resin, and angelica root.</end_of_turn Mix it with vinegar and boiled water, and make small pills, and let one pill dissolve in lukewarm water, and give it to the patient in the nose as desired.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxv.	End of treatment. XXV.</end_of_turn>
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From this time forward, the patient will remain in the nose's extremities.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The fainting of the patient is normal in the extremities of the nose, and is magnificent and commendable for five days until the patient recovers accordingly.</end_of_turn
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason you must take note of the beginning of the appearance of the symptoms, and report everything.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And immediately stop over the wound or cautery or medicine that was placed on the wound.</end_of_turn
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If it is delayed in its appearance, but is magnificent, consider whether it is bloody, dark, of a yellow color, and without sensation; do not touch that which is the cause of the apostem of the cranium, because its great malice causes this.</end_of_turn
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the apostem is of a reddish color and is not dark, and when the infection begins it is possible in all of them, then evacuate the patient and apply that remedy, and take care of the wound until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxvi.	End of treatment. XXVI.</end_of_turn
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of suture of the nose and lips and ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by chance.</end_of_turn
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You must know that when continuity is dissolved in one of these cartilages, little confidence is had in that operation except in the case of very wise people.</end_of_turn
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you must do something for some cause of these, consider if it is fresh plague on the face, and when you have adjusted the two lips of the plague with sutures, take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the soles of the patient's solution of continuity have already been separated, and any part is healthy, then you must scrub away a part of the apparent codena until it is healed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And so adjust the two layers near the suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle salt and powder, and place over the powder a pad of lint or another of the solidifying plasters, and leave that bound for two days or three, and then remove that and replace it with another, and leave that in place until the wound is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the skill of the suture be that you add the solution of continuity or with needles just as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread just as well as you please and tell.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.</end_turn>
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of that cause which occurs in the two layers of the skin in the parts inside the joints.</end_turn
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	And thus go to the house of several people in the parts inside the joints of their limbs several wrinkles resembling grass seeds, and some of them are smaller and some are greater.</end_turn
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore you must convert the layers and wounds each of those hardness throughout, and over them apply a poultice of sage powder until the wound is closed, and then wash it with wine and cure the area with what is styptic, until it is healed.</end_turn
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.</end_turn
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of the bone adjusted in the sockets.</end_turn
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Greatly of vegetable matters there is no more over the adjusted bone socket which they formerly called albulus, whereupon you must suspend that with one hand or that you have the forceps and make an incision there and insert the cause, and leave the healing run its course or the wound will heal.</end_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And so place over the area sage powder or another powder astringent or excipient.</end_turn
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the bone returns, then you must again make an incision and cauterize that, for if you do not cauterize it will not return.</end_turn
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.</end_turn
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for teeth with iron.</end_turn
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the parts inside and outside and between the gums there are adjusted rough scales, legs, and some are black and are citrine or green because of the corruption of the gum, which is harmful to the teeth that are left.</end>
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore you must remove the disease from between your teeth and suspend the cap of the tongue in the belly, and scrape the teeth in which those scales appear until no harmful cause remains, and what remains of the blackness and the citrine color and the others that may be modified.</end>
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And if this remains at the beginning of the cause, it is not; and if not, then you must repeat the cause on the other side on the second and third days until the last degree is reached in what you wish.</end
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have needed various forms of movement and various figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.</end><end_turn>
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Therefore the razors with which the tooth is shaved from the inside part are different from the razors with which it is shaved between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of shaving must be prepared by you, which you will see soon.</end
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.</end_turn
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the extraction of teeth.</end_turn
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Therefore you must treat the tooth of its pain with all your skill and later in the whole eradication of it, for there is no cause that replaces the substance of the tooth when it is eradicated, which is a sublime substance that is excused in the eradication of it.</end
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, when the disease is urgent that tooth must be eradicated, you must firmly declare that it is the painful tooth, for many substances deceive the disease and cause that it be in a healthy tooth, and you must eradicate that and the pain will cease until the painful and diseased tooth is eradicated, as we have seen in the operation of the barbers.</end
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore you must be certified that this is the painful tooth, and that you know well, that you must mark on the circumference of the tooth with a spatula in which there is any virtue, until it is dissolved from the root of the tooth throughout, and you must do that with your hands or with fine forceps from the beginning gradually until that is complete.</end
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And now let someone strong hold the patient's shoulders firmly for good speaking or stupor, and keep the patient's head between the thighs that he does not move, and then draw the tooth according to the rule in a manner that neither the patient nor the greater pain does not increase.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and put it on his hands from every part to facilitate and expedite the removal of the tumor as it is done from the beginning
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is fractured or rotten, then take care that you cover your hand with that cloth and grasp that with the tip of your thumb so that it is not fractured when you tighten it up on that area that you hold
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And take care that you work diligently with sacrifice throughout the circumference of the gums and that you keep your hand firm so that you do not fracture that, and remain still from it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the first pain of his foot.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And keep in mind that you do not do anything that ignorant barbers do in their fisting and audacity regarding the extirpation of their teeth, since they do not administer what has been recommended; for many veined patients make come greater evils than those that have been mentioned, and the causes of their miseries remain hidden, or some of them, or that they extract that tooth without any bones of the mandible as many veined patients have testified
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the extirpation of the teeth, let the mouth be washed with wine that has been boiled or wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows out from the saint to aid, as many veined patients do, then take any amount of saffron and sprinkle it on the plague, and if you do not confirm that saffron, cauterize.</end_of_turn>
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and needles which are useful for grasping the tooth at the beginning is either of long handle and wide mouth, or of short handle and broad, so that they are not bent when working on them.</end_of_turn>
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And thus sometimes with a broad mouth and sometimes with a short handle, as soon as you begin with those, they are not bent, but if they are short handled they are stretched out.</end_of_turn>
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are useful of Indian steel descending as well as of bronze handles, and in the handling of those, teeth are introduced one into the other and are tightened with strong constriction. Some of the veined patients make the handles like the beak of a heron, so it is round, and are of strong constriction.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxxi.</end_of_turn>
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the extirpation of teeth and the extraction of the bones of the mandibles fractured.</end_of_turn>
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the tooth is fractured and remains for some cause, then you must keep your hand over the wound border for a day or two until the wound is softened; and then bring in relief or support the handles which are assembled like the beak of a heron called ciconia or round, of the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The handles are useful both as lime or as aloe.</end_of_turn
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your will with these forceps or needles, then you must fall upon the reason and uncover all the bone and insert the instrument which has the name of atali, so it is a small lever whose form is like this:</start_of_turn>
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And be of short handle large a little, and do not be grasped so that it is fractured.</start_of_turn
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if for this the reason is forgotten, do not do it; but if you do, help with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of a triangular handle in which there is any thickness:</start_of_turn
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and of more subtle handle.</start_of_turn
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you have helped with this instrument having two slopes of which this is the form close to the following:</start_of_turn
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which I will enumerate in the shaving of teeth; for help is useful with this instrument which is assembled like an onion, and this is the form:</start_of_turn
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular handle that is thick or short, which is any thickness, and do not be grasped so that it is fractured.</start_of_turn
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other things that the instruments of the teeth are like those mentioned above.</start_of_turn
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	However, the learned and skillful artists in the art, finds for themselves the means according to what he understands of the operation and the various diseases; for these are the diseases for which the ancients did not say or even advise any proper instrument, for the forms of various species.</start_of_turn
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May be if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if necessary, the pain is cured upon that which is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and it helps you with the way in which this is done.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And in any great or small degree, and be it tight or loose at the mouth so that it does not escape or run until the bone is completely healed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines at that which is convenient.</end_of_turn>
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May be if the bone is slightly broken, reduce that of that break and of its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.</end_turn>
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the care of prominent teeth over the others.</end_turn>
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent beyond their natural shape for those of the same kind, and especially when they encroach upon the gums, and especially upon the holy lips; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is not properly aligned with another tooth, and it is not possible to file or ligate it, the pain must remain in that place; but if it is not attached to another tooth, you must insert that instrument into this area which has this shape; and it is like cutting through pork, and is done with a sharp iron of India for extraction.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be at the place where you insert that instrument for several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not similar to that of other teeth.</end_of_turn
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of iron of India which has this shape:</end_of_turn
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of iron of India and the margin be well-marked; and let there be little points as if with a needle, with which the tooth is filed little by little in several days with ease, so that it is not like other teeth which are jagged.</end_of_turn
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line that at the end, and reduce that which is in the socket.</end_of_turn
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth of which a part is fractured and the tongue is bleeding, the pain must cover that until the expectation of that fragment is overcome and equalized, and be filled so that the tongue does not bleed nor the word corrupt.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.</end_turn
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.</end_turn
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or extraction, and the patient does not suffer from pain, and you have cured that with soothing medicines, and it has not been of use, the pain must be remedied by placing gold which is strong in those which are strong, and not of silver which becomes green and is soon weak, even though it is more expensive.</end_of_turn
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the gold be in such flexibility and roughness as the quantity which must enter between the teeth; and the way of placing is that you take hold of the gold and take twice its length between two healthy teeth, and that you make it grow between two crooked surfaces of the gold between two decayed teeth, or if one or two, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth of the other side.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the tissue inside the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is not decayed.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your striction be at the place where you strengthen the gold must not escape.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then remove the excess of the gold with forceps or pliers, and add those to the area where you are working, and convert those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And thus read that again carefully.</end_of_turn
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is slipped or rough, strengthen that or those with another gold in such a way at all times.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two decayed teeth, as sometimes these are linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return a tooth or two back in place near some other, and they have fallen out, let them recede as we have recommended, and let them remain.</end>
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Do not do anything except a good craftsman and a wise man.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Many herbs are suitable for various causes of bone fractures, and it is useful to them as a kind of tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth is absent, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	The text reads: "From the beginning of the ligament which is seen in the tongue and prevents that."
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is seen in the tongue and prevents that ... This ligament which is seen to leave the tongue some veins or is naturally associated with it, or is accidental and caused by an infection which has already hardened.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation for it is that we burn the mouth of the disease, that is, the soft palate which exists in the belly; and elevate the soft palate, and then we cut that ligament of nerves as far as it is necessary until the tongue is freed from its retraction.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	Maybe there is some hardness or denudation, and that is because of the consolidation of the infection; however, when you have cut once and split that (ligament) as far as necessary until you have cut the ligament and the nodulation has been dissolved
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care that there is no tear in the preparation of the flesh and that you cut here the arteries and let blood flow freely.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with oil or vinegar or with cold water; and then leave the tongue loose; so is the cause of which the patient has left the tongue in any night so that it is not consolidated again by any vein.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Maybe there is bleeding of blood, leave your hand over the great toe which is treated; maybe the blood boils, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery which you will apply to the blood.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	The text ends here.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Extraction of wisdom tooth leaves the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some veins accidentally leave the tongue swollen like a small nail which hinders the natural operation of the tongue; and because of that it is greatly increased until the mouth is dry
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation for it is that we burn the mouth of the disease sitting in front of the sun and consider the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if sometimes you see a yellow or black, dark spot, tough, to which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is wrinkled.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then put on your glove and cut that with a sharp lancet, and cut it out completely; and if blood boils at the time of your operation, then leave your hand over the great toe which is treated, so that it is not dry, until the blood is contained
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have finished with it, until it is washed with oil or vinegar and salt; and take care of the other care for the blood until it is healed
Capitol .xxxvi.	The text ends here
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Extraction of wisdom tooth of two carpal bones and of that which is nothing in the heel and of the other wisdom teeth.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the wisdom tooth is embedded in the jaw, so are the glands which are assembled together and which are causing the pain, they are two carpal bones which when you treat them with water as we have said in the division and they are not healed, then you consider if the wisdom tooth is tough, yellow, without sensation, then do not touch that which is bleeding
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of black color and the root is large, then do not touch that which is bleeding for the flow of blood; take away that which is soft, and you can either extract that or leave it broken by itself
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the root is slight, then that which is that must be cut out.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation for it is that you consider, before your operation, if the wisdom tooth has already rested calm for a complete rest or if it is diminished by any diminution; and when you have done that, burn the mouth of the patient, put the head of the patient in the belly, and burn the mouth of the patient, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of the patient leaving aside noble instruments of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it is done with silver or with gold, and it is slight like a tile.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore when you promise that to the patient and he shows you the wisdom tooth, and you put your hand over that which is in the belly, then take your glove and stay there, and pull that out to the outside as much as you can
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another one which you must pull out is the cause of the tunicas, and then cut that with that instrument of which this is the form
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is assembled like forceps, however the extremities of these are bent, so that the orifice of each one is in the belly of the other, not acute, which is iron inside.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your disposal, the mark of this spatum is that it is acute at one end and blunt at the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have made an incision, now make the other according to this manner of handling, and immediately apply cold water to the patient to prevent swelling
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If blood flows too freely, keep cold water of decoction of meadowsweet or ivy leaves and adhere to what has been said concerning the causes until the flow of blood is restricted, and take care of that which has been said to be healthy.</start_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And every vegetable that grows in the ground, others after these two ankles, and make an incision according to what has been said and as I have said concerning the incision of two holes that equal.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a a woman of apostemas who was born in the ground of her, who had a tendency to dark color, little sensation, who had already closed the ground of her, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and I had already forbidden her to eat and drink water, and she was already on the verge of death if more water had not been given for a day or two.</start_of_turn>
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the apostema had already protruded so much that there were two ramps between that and the heel for two steps.</start_of_turn>
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I stitched it up fistulously and remained on one of its sides, and I pulled out that which was large from it, and I threw it away from me, and I immediately closed that which I had left open, and I squeezed its tongue, and I put its thumb in that apostema.</start_of_turn
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I immediately bled away a great part of it, and it did not run from it except for a little blood.</start_of_turn
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the ground of that woman is absolutely healed, and she immediately began to drink water, and to eat food, so I did not cease to make an incision of that apostema for a long time, and afterwards there appeared another apostema in its place, which I also incised as long as that.</start_of_turn
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I pray and cauterize the ground of her, so that there will be no more addiction; and immediately I went out and did not stop until I saw that God had mercy on me concerning that.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxvii.	End of document.</start_of_turn>
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the incision of the heel when it is apostematized.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the heel discharges downwards, and it is apostematized and is long, the hour is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the outer part large and round, and the hour is called bubbly.</start_of_turn
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	If when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and you do not take care of your wound, and sometimes the apostema is burnt out already and is subtle, the hour covers that you must make an incision which is round; and if it is in that length, and there is blood, of a dark color or black, and it is not at the center, the hour covers that you must fear the incision of it, because there is fear of the patient.</start_of_turn
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you do it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient groan and press the tongue with the instrument with which you shape it, and immediately put the thumb on the new one and throw away the old one, and make an incision with one of the two instruments which I have mentioned at the incision of two holes.</start_of_turn
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And cover that you do not make an incision except when it is adjusted according to the natural term of its addiction, because if you make it more, you will make it worse.</start_of_turn
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And immediately after the incision, use the water which we have recommended at the incision of two holes, and take care of that which is healthy.</start_of_turn
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by the incision of the heel, cover that you use an instrument in the cauterization of the heel in your fear, and the manner of the cautery is nothing but acute water, and that you keep the head of the patient still, and immediately press the tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, and immediately take some water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and comfort that which is alive, and stop that which is not thick or subtle, and from that fill the hollow of the instrument which has this shape.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	As well as the bending of the cavity in which the medicine is placed is like the curvature of the heel of a ray, and stop the instrument with the medicine on the nail, the patient will lick over the lips for so that he spits or wipes away the mucus from the mouth of that because of the intrinsic medicine, for so that there is no discharge from that of any cause over the ground of the heel and that he recover that.</start_of_turn
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And keep your hand firmly on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for about a minute until it becomes numb and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and put the ray onto the cotton in a tube so that the cotton adheres to the tube, and do so until you have achieved what you desire from the cautery of the uvula, and then remove that which makes it dry and fall away in about three or four days.</end_of_turn>
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you doubt that the medicine has been completely absorbed, repeat it, and when you have finished cauterizing the uvula, remove that which is in the circuit of the ray above the coto, and apply something that will harden that which is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash with cold water, and cure with ointment, and bind with bandages until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is more useful than the beginning and more long-lasting.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some diseases of the uvula are cured with things that are more subtle than cautery and more beneficial, which is cured by fumigation in this way: mix cinnamon, rue, origanum, rosemary, bitter almonds, chamomile, broth and similar herbs, and add all these things together, or some of them, in a bowl, and pour vinegar over them, and let them bubble; and let the vinegar be poured onto the area of the bowl steadily, and under the vinegar there should be a sponge, on which should be placed an instrument of iron according to this manner; let it be made of silver or iron.</end_of_turn>
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the limb be introduced into the mouth of the patient until the vapor makes the uvula rise above the canula, until the uvula is not opaque.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat over that swelling until it is dry, and keep that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the swelling, because it would be too severe for the swelling, and would not be enough to cure it, but you must declare the swelling to be over after performing this treatment.</end_of_turn>
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Or if you do not have this instrument, take a tube and apply in the limb a cloth of wool, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, because the cloth of wool prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.</end_of_turn
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxviii.	(The text continues with additional medical advice.)</start_of_turn>
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extraction of splinters and of that which adheres in the cavity and of the other causes.</start_of_turn
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Swelling adheres in the cavity or spine of the foot or any other cause.</start_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then cover that which appears to be causing the swelling, on which you cast your glance, with a pointed instrument of steel, so that you can be informed of what is in the cavity.</start_of_turn
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is hidden in the cavity, cover that you vomit the patient while the food is still in the stomach, because it strengthens the underlying cause of the swelling if it is left undigested; or that you swallow the patient a spoonful of bread or radish or a spoonful of dry bread; or give her a spoonful of sponge of marine lime, which you must bind firmly with faith, and hold that firmly in place.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and bind it firmly with thread, and keep it bound; or take a bowl and bind it firmly with thread.</start_of_turn
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if the underlying causes have not been removed, take an instrument of lead according to this manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a ray, and in the limb there should be a cavity in which you put your finger into the cavity of the patient.</start_of_turn
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And keep the patient’s head elevated above his heart, and keep that your touch of the hand does not touch the belly, so that you do not damage the bones or the spine, or that the physician put his hand on it.</start_of_turn
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient vomits excessively, because of his knowledge of the location of the underlying cause and of the swelling in his belly, he should remove his hand from the instrument in his hand, as much as he is able, until it is expelled.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood clot which is annexed to the cavity.</start_of_turn
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is medicated with what has been said in the division of care with medicines and not confirmed, consider the hour in the patient's groin towards the sunlight, because you have compressed the tongue of the patient with the instrument which you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if sometimes the bloodsucker, extract that one which is small or slightly sticky downwards adequately.</end_of_turn>
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract from that, take a curved needle and insert it into the patient's groin, and place on the concave side of the needle a burning iron, and do this until the bloodsucker is dead and remains outside the cavity.</end_of_turn
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then prepare a basin full of cold water, open its mouth in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not allow anything to pass from that until an hour has passed, since the bloodsucker has suffered as much as when the water is cold.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However if it is not recommended in that which we have said, the hour overshadows the patient with their head bowed or stifled by the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.</end_of_turn>
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do thus, so that it falls away.</end_of_turn>
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	This is another way of operating in the fumigation of that, that you take a bowl in which are burning coals and cover the bowl with a cover in the middle of which is a hook, and compose that hook on the extremity of the instrument; and then withdraw the cover from the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth over the extremity of the needle, and close the patient's mouth so that the fumigation is not too strong until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, since the bloodsucker has fallen away.</end_of_turn
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall away, the hour repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, eating salty foods and other things, and do not drink water, and if necessary is that in this regimen is excluded.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker is treated from the groin when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps in this way, but it is curved in some way:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed upon the groin, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a heron, which is hooked, in which is inserted the thumb, so that when any cause is compressed, that does not bite.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xl.	The text ends here.</end_of_turn>
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the words in praise of the termination of ailments and sections of them.</end_of_turn
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostemas are various, of various methods, as it is remembered from some of them in this book.</end_of_turn
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are various in perforation and section of them by two methods, one for the kind of apostemas in themselves; and for what they compress of humors.</end_of_turn
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the ailments occur, because the apostema that occurs in the head is different from the apostema that occurs in the buttocks; and the apostema in the fleshy part is different from the apostema that occurs in the joint; and each one of them is its own judgment for operation.</end_of_turn
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some apostemas that should not be perforated but only at the right time of the illness in those or in addition to them.</end_of_turn
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other apostemas which must be grasped when they are crossed, and are not matured according to their complement, just as apostemas which are proper for joints, for an apostem which is in a joint, the thing is to prolong it until it becomes poor in the circumference of it, and that it does not corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, because it is a harmful cause of contraction of that limb; or that it is a prop of the main limb, and if you delay the perforation of it when it is matured it does not help the main limb; or that it is proper of the buttocks, so perforate it only when it is not matured; and do not perforate it blindly, without completing digestion, but only that which is proper of the buttocks, so that you do not weaken the heel of the buttock and that it is elongated to the parts below the buttock, and that there is a fistula, or that it is beneficial in the end that it is not healthy.</end_of_turn
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is better that you know the time of the perforation of the apostema, and that is when it is matured.</end_of_turn
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the ceasing of fever, and also the diminution of swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the apostema, and the other signs.</end_of_turn
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	The wound must be closed from below the groin towards the navel, and comes from the care of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The wound must be closed along the length of the limb or body, if the abscesses are in the armpits or the feet, and in the places of the lacerations, of the nerves' cords, of the arteries; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use perforation as in that limb.</end_of_turn>
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	More when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then you must let the wound close until the digestion of the abscess is confirmed according to custom, as we have said; for if you perforate it before, you prolong the suffering of the patient and cause more pain, and you harden the edges of the wound and its depth.</end_of_turn>
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More abscesses must be perforated according to the breadth of the limb or the body as necessary, or according to what the limb digests.</end_of_turn>
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must give a small perforation, and in large abscesses great perforation and wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.</end_of_turn
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are the abscesses in which you must make the cordena concave and inflamed, when it is finished that it should already be stiff, as in the case of trops of boils and abscesses.</end_of_turn
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus like the figure of a ivy leaf, thus the abscesses of the armpits.</end_of_turn
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those there are those in which round section and lunar section are administered, and they resemble the latter.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More of those to whom it is not possible like external abscesses, you must perforate that with superficial perforation, or only flat.</end_of_turn
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you perforate that and do not hesitate to extract all of that in that hour; having extracted from that a part, then you must fill the abscess again the next day, and extract another part the next day, and so make that the pus becomes softened gradually until it is forgotten.</end>
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And more if the patient is of cold temperament, or a woman in her period, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and thus the patient is relieved, and you must leave it like that.</end
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful to keep this chapter with great care, and when you perforate these abscesses, that you remove the boils and consider whether the boil of the abscess is little or is a flat section, when you administer which of them or of the coto in antic; and if the abscess is large and the cracks of the perforation are many, that you stop mechanically in any place until they have healed together.</end
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cordena has been broken or has sunk into the surrounding area, that you must support it with old cloth or with thread of silk, just as when you have brought bread or cheese, because of its humidity; and strengthen that within the third day; and then proceed with that and care for it so that it heals without any inflammation until it is healed.</end
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	More if an outflow of pus occurs in the hour of your operation, then you must administer cold water and vinegar in which there is a thread of silk, and stop that over the place of the outflow of the pus until the pus becomes softened.</end
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	More if the outflow of the pus continues, then you must administer regimen and care and the powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.</end
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	More if it is in winter, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must cover with powder in wine and oil caut, and put those on the places.</end>
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you must cover with powder in almonds with water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that until the third day, as we have said, and then you must remove the abscess and extract that, and administer the care that is appropriate for it until it is healed.</end
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary for the cognition of the care of abscesses universally, more according to the way of distinction that I have already said of every abscess in what way it is to be cared for according to the chapters singly.</end
Capitol .xli.	Chapter LXI.</end>
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of abscesses which are in the cordena of the head.</end
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	The small bones at the ankle are connected by nodes that contain sacs filled with fluid; and these sacs move freely.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	They are like small pearls, and in those there is moisture similar to wax.</end_of_turn>
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And in those there are those that contain moisture similar to resin, resembling stones; and those are hard.</end_of_turn>
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all this, and in the extraction of these, there is no fear, as when you extend these does not cause damage to the artery.</end_of_turn>
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation of extracting these is that you grasp them with an instrument of the kind that you see, which is called tweezers, until you believe that it contains.</end_of_turn>
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if that which is contained is moisture, then split that by section according to its length by superficial section in this way:</end_of_turn
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section from the line of B to the line of G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then you wipe away that from which that moisture was contained, and do not leave from that any cause of this, for if there remains from that any cause, it will return.</end_of_turn>
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And immediately immerse the limb in Egyptian unguents, if there is any, or in water and salt; and fill that with the ointment and leave that until tomorrow, for that which is corrupted will be consumed by that.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And repeat over that limb with Egyptian unguents several times if you wish, until you believe that there is no longer any cause of that limb; for the ointment will cure the wound while it is healing.</end_of_turn
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the ankle contains fat nodes, then you pierce that as follows:</end>
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and grasp nails between two lips of the section and tear that from all around, and exert your skill in extracting the sac which contains that.</end>
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May it be that your artery is damaged by this, but I will tell you first.</end>
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the lapizated ankle of section and care according as you have been told; and the section of the lapizated ankle is less severe, for it has little pain and little moisture.</end
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And many times these veins are liable to these ankles which are in the head in bones which have no moisture; the cause of which is that I do not know of any ankle in the head of an old woman which does not swell like a deaf stone, rough, white, which cannot be softened, and if any of those is struck in that place, the ankle will swell.</end
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in the other ankles there is another thing which is not in this book, namely the ankles which are found in the heads of children, and you must take the reason for the swelling of the ankles, for indeed the section of these is superficial section.</end
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower part downwards so that the body of the pain is relieved in the lower parts.</start
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And take care of those with water as you consider convenient for the care of the wound.</start
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter LII.</start
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of the scrofulas which occur in the ankle.</start
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moistened veins cause these ankles to swell in the heel and in the instep and in the ankle; and some veins cause swelling in the other parts of the body.</start
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And so those which happen in the heel, and those which are generated between them, and all the scrofula of these is due to the rupture of their own sac, just as in the nodes and ankle of the head, as we have recounted.</start
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are moist, for some of them are like stones, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.</start
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in that case when you have good opportunity in the touch, of which the color of the liquid that is manifested is appropriate for the color of the heel, and it is bad throughout, and is not annexed to the nerves of the heel, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not a swelling, you must pierce that which is like superficial skin of the part from the part beyond the body of the line G within the line B, and remove that from all around, and stretch two lips of the heel on an inch, or on nails if necessary, as we have said concerning the ankles of the head, and extract that little by little.</start
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	Beware lest the vein or nerve be injured.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Do not make the wound too acute, for thereby you may damage the patient, or irritate the illness, and you may thereby introduce something which is not necessary to introduce; for if you cut the vein or artery, you will prevent the flow of blood, and this will delay the healing of the wound, and cause further suffering.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood has clotted.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation when you have completed it
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And inquire whether there is any other small swelling, for these also must be cut away and drained.</end_of_turn>
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the root of the large vein, cover that the while time you are cutting away that swelling.</end_of_turn>
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then cover that with a firm bandage and keep it there until it has fallen out by itself.</end_of_turn>
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in vinegar, and then care for that.</end_of_turn
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut away the entire swelling, then cover that you adjust the two lips of the wound and extract as much pus as possible so that there is no excess liquid.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	More often, however, if there is still excess liquid due to the great size of the swelling, cover that you understand how to cut away the root of that, and remove that and administer stitches and what is said.</end_of_turn
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And as for those swellings which contain moisture, pierce that superficial perforation here where you see the mature parts of them, and do not perforate further than that, for if you do you will bring pus from below the belly, just as we have said.</end_of_turn
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And administer the perforation cautiously, warming it in vinegar and keeping it wet, so that it will not irritate the surrounding area.</end_of_turn
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the wound has already healed, then care for it by applying ointment of generative ointment until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xliii.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the incision of the heel of the foot to the healing of the wound it is necessary to keep the patient under observation.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	I say that this section has never been known in our land.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of the sermon of these people.</end_of_turn
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In women it is not advisable to extract the heel, for this may cause damage to the veins and arteries of the patient.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have swellings caused by bites in the mouth or swelling or two abscesses, when the disease is not in the bone, it is useful to perform an excision of the heel to prevent the loss which is caused by perforation.</end_of_turn
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore we must say that when we wish to perform an excision of the heel, we must make three circles around the circle of the heel, or four if the section is to be extensive, for the quantity between two circles is great; and the section should be made in fat, not in cartilage, for this place is private of fat and the vessels of blood of the heel are loosened.</end_of_turn
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, cover that he should extend the tendon of the heel with an incision, and then open the tendon until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And administer the incision according to what we have recommended; and it is significant to perform the section of the canal for the inflammation which is caused by that pus which is from it and for the rupture of the voice.</end_of_turn
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.</end_of_turn
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour has passed in which the perforation is feared, add two lips to the edge of the wound, and cut only the cartilage.</end_of_turn
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And administer medicines that will cause the fat to disappear until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Indeed, the sum of the sayings which we have recommended is that the exposure is nothing other than to see that some of these abscesses have already rendered the heel of the foot useless, and that the disease is overcome within death, and the marrow of it is dried up, and the fat is separated from it, and the latter goes to perforate the epiglottis so that the disease can escape through the wound on every breath, and is saved from death.</end_of_turn
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And thus I command you to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed; for the malice of the disease lasts for three days; therefore I command you to close the wound when the disease is gone, and heal that which remains.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And thus I have seen for my purpose that a maid brought a pot and poured it into his groin and burned him with that a part of the edge of the lung, and I was called to his care, and I wiped away the mucus just as it is moved from the dead, and I uncovered the wound and wiped away the pus that was in it little by little.</end_of_turn>
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I confess that there was neither vein nor nerve injured, and that the swelling went down from the wound, and I cured that when it was healed.</end_of_turn>
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not blame the maid if she remained hoarse, and after a few days she returned to perfect health.</end_of_turn>
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the groin there is no fear.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section concerning the swelling that happens outside the groin, and it is called hernia of the groin.</end_of_turn
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This swelling which is called hernia of the groin is great according to the color of the body, and it is not in women.</end_of_turn
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two methods, either it is natural or accidental.</end_of_turn
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural it is not capable of healing.</end_of_turn
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two methods, one is like grass knots, and the other is like a swelling which is caused by the bursting of an artery, and in that there is fear.</end_of_turn
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	It is not necessary to fear it as with iron except for that which is small.</end_of_turn
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you must know that if you find it like grass knots, and if it is not suspended from any vein, then you must prick it just as if it were a node, and extract that which is under the skin and the pus; but if not, it is necessary to examine all the groin to see if there is anything else that requires care, and to take care of that which is necessary until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section concerning the species of nodes.</end_of_turn
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes there are many species, and I have already mentioned all the species in the division.</end_of_turn
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary to know the difference between a node and an extrusion in order to avoid doubt.</end_of_turn
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an extrusion is a quality which has heat and fever and severe pain until the swelling of the fluid subsides; and it is accompanied by corruption that when the fever ceases the pain and the heat cease.</end_of_turn
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node is not heat or fever or pain, but it contains that thick liquid which is in the belly or sac itself.</end_of_turn
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its commencement is like cheese and is found just as well whether large or small, and there are two species, one of which is like fat and contains moisture, and the color of the moisture is various, as I have already said in the division.</end_of_turn
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the care of a node, you must extract that and inquire about the commencement of the pain which is called internal, according to how its form will be in the chapter which is adjacent to this one.</end_of_turn
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for swellings and for all nodes, that you grasp this pain and bring that which is in the cavity which you find in the swelling, and you will remove the strings which you see until you know that the pain has penetrated the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally put your hand according to the measure of the size of the swelling, and extract the internal part and consider what remains of it.</end_of_turn
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture of whatever color it is, you must prick it on the superficial layer according to what I have said concerning other swellings.</end_of_turn
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture left from the internal part, you will know that it is fat.</end_of_turn
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it over it in a cross shape according to this figure:</end_of_turn
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	May be if it is fractured in the operation, it is not possible to extract that callous matter, and many veins have been seen to bleed thereupon, and therefore you must extract it piecemeal until no cause remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, slight or much, the node returns according to the way
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes some small part remains, then complete the wound with several corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place your hand over that which is to be sutured, and care for the other care until it is healed
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the node is great, then you must clamp its lips and care for that which is inside.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May be if the pulse is towards the opposite, or is not pulsating, then you must cover and empty the area of the wound with chaff which is old and rough, and apply that thread for two days or three until the wound is healed and the swelling has subsided; and then return to sawing what is left of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, the forms of the intestines are three in number, which are great, middle, and small
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the great intestine is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the middle intestine is as follows
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small intestine is as follows
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They make incisions from iron, from alum, from severed extremities that are placed downward, so that they may rest in the incisions.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experts, and they are called barbers, and one of them is called barber.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds, which are great, middle, and small
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great expert is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the middle expert is as follows
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small expert is as follows
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	I believe that these are for incisions and exits and fistulas and swellings so that between these there are bones and other causes
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make round, hooked, lion-like, just as large needles with which the threads are sewn, and they are made of gold, or of silver, or of iron, or of lead. And the threads are when they are made of gold
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made by black plum experts, who remember that for these the fistulas are opened in the concavity of which there are reflections, which are reflected back by their elevation from those reflections
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds, of which some are long, and others middle, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the great expert of plum is as follows
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the middle expert of plum is as follows
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small expert of plum is as follows
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of nails are of various kinds, which are of two kinds, which is a simple curve, and of three kinds: great, small and middle
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And there are blunt nails, and of three kinds
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails having two curves, and of three kinds
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails having three curves, and of three kinds
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a simple great nail is as follows
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple middle nail is as follows
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a simple small nail is as follows
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a blunt great nail is as follows
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form a single orb, form them thus:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form a single ball, form them thus:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form a single ball, having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form a single orb, form them thus:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form a single ball, having two curves.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form a single ball, having three curves
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form a single orb, form them thus
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form a single ball, having three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut, and there are three species, of which one is great, one medium, and one small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of great scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of medium scalpel
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those on which the incision is made are sharp, and the others are not sharp, and they are not to be grasped in such a way, but rather that it should be done gently in order to avoid injuring the veins or nerves, and for those it is healthy to the patient and gives peace that a little be added to the incision which causes the bursting of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of almagidas, and there are three species: great, medium, and small, just like grapes.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great magda:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of medium magda:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small magda:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are useful for ears and resemble a ray on which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extremity where the puncture is made with the sponge hidden and in which runs towards the inner and outer parts, when you wish, just as you see it.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers should perform the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceive the pain, and there are three species: great, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of winds with which the flow of blood is broken, and there are three species; great, medium, and small; the forms of these:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are useful for ears, round with any length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And that these three species of winds should be taken because of their great, medium, and small size, so that by these the flow of blood is broken with speed when necessary, and when you first arrive it is not medicine
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to break the blood in any part of the body, and do not use them in places that are not fleshy, such as in the cavities of the limbs and the buttocks, and in the veins, and in the breasts, and the belly and the groin, and they resemble those of fleshy wounds that are hummed
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And many other herbs are useful for those instruments and other small things resembling fish scales according to this form; for which the blood is broken when it is made for phlebotomy, or due to the incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And many herbs are useful round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of the breasts of men which are assembled of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some herbs make the breasts of young men swell due to their sleep with them when they begin to become hairy, and in this way they swell the breasts and assemble the breasts of women, and remain abscesses, leaving scars.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to him who suffers from this, cover that with lunar incision according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and remove the whole hardness, and replace the wound with an ointment of medicinal ointment, and adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and take care of that which is within that it is healed
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	More so if the breast leans towards the outer parts and is softened by its magnitude just as it is for women, the hour is that it is split into two lateral sections as wide as possible, with two cuts resembling a lunar shape, of which each is contained in the other one because of the end of each one, until the greater line contains the smaller one according to this form of the line of B and the line of G. And in this way remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and keep the swelling, and administer what has been said of the suture and the patches that are necessary for the healing until it is healed
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not comply with the incision of that which covers the cause of the patient's discomfort, and for the flow of blood, it is necessary that you hempe the plague of coto submerged in corrosive ointment and leave that which corrodes until that which corrodes is rosin of the grease, and then care for that which remains that is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	If you do not comply with the incision of that which covers the cause of the patient's discomfort, and for the flow of blood, it is necessary that you hempe the plague of coto submerged in corrosive ointment and leave that which corrodes until that which corrodes is rosin of the grease, and then care for that which remains that is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	When the abscesses of the species of nodes or of the scrophulas are, then you split over that again as we have said in the section about the equal scrophulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	May the plague be extended in such a way that it will not suffice to reduce it, then administer in it the cautery as we have said above
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol .xlviii.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of abscesses that happen by cutting or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the cutting is ruptured, and the cord is consolidated which is above that, then move the veins away that are adjacent to the abscess. It is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by the artery or vein: for when the abscess is caused by cutting, it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and that when you touch the abscess with the fingers, sitting in the place where there is a stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is caused by the vein is redone at the sign of the body
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision about this abscess is wrong, and especially in those that leave the abscesses, and in the armpits, and in the groin, and in many places of the body; and it is not great, therefore it is necessary that its care be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, must be avoided
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	May about that which is for the inflammation of the orifice of the cutting, split the cord section in the long; and immediately grasp the section with a clamp and the cutting, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And immediately put over that needle and make that penetrate into the other side, and open the cutting with faith doubled in two places, — which causes and you will see in the extraction of two veins which are in the temples
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And immediately put on the place where are between two ligaments with a sponge so that when the blood is gone away that which is in it, and be dissolved the abscess
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately administer care in which is engendered poverty until the ligaments fall; and care that is convenient with ointment until it is healthy
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is caused by the cutting of a vein, then you must have in your hand what is at your disposal of the abscess at the cord, and immediately put in the needle that you had your hand from, and make that penetrate; and be in that fold doubled until you extract that from the other side, and immediately ligate the abscess with a good ligament as I have said above in the section of the grape of two parts at two extremities of the fold.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May if you fear that you will extract the fold, then immediately put in the faith with that needle from all the abscess you must leave the incision of the first needle, and strengthen the tissues firmly in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And immediately dry the abscess in the middle of its place until when it is gone away that which is in it, then you will cut the excess of the cord, and leave what is bound.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And immediately stop over the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and immediately administer the care which is useful with calamine and ointment until it is healthy
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitol l of the abscess which happens for the twist of nerves
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	In just the same way as it happens with an abscess caused by cutting or by a vein, and in the same way as it happens with an abscess caused by their percussion or by excessive work, and for some other reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is customary for them to make points on the toes or ankles, or in any place where they suspect there is inflammation of the joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a serious ailment, appearing like the color of the rest of the body, and is most common among those who have a lot of wealth, and when it is severe, it causes the patient to appear stunned
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not a superficial ailment, but rather one that penetrates the very depths of the body, so leave the bandage alone, and do not touch anything further.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, when it comes to the joints, it is not enough just to apply pressure with iron, for a strong contraction must accompany it
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	More than that, if it is on the head or the front of the face apply the bandage with force.</start_of_turn>
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	More than if it is a slight ailment, in that case you must force them and cut away that which is unnecessary.</start_of_turn>
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then you must suspend it with a bandage, and wash it away, and then hold it in place; and suture the wound so that it heals properly.</start_of_turn
Capitol .li.	End of document.</start_of_turn>
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Section on the treatment of gout, which occurs when cold humors infiltrate the body and cause swelling in the joints.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Therefore, all those who are afflicted with this disease in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies are called fungal because of their resemblance to fungi; for the root of the disease is subtle, and the head of the disease is large; and their lips are dry, and it is of those who are small, and is of those who are not magnificent.</start_of_turn>
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have already seen one case where two of these patients in the belly resembled fungi in every way, and there was no difference between the white ones and the dark ones, those with little root.</start_of_turn
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And their lips were dry and cracked, and sweat ran from their bodies all the time.</start_of_turn
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I conclude that these people have gout and I anoint their feet accordingly.</start_of_turn and the other one has it in the ankles.</start_of_turn
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the treatment for the disease is to consider if the patient is sweating, and if the color of the ailment is white, humous, of subtle root; then you must make a burn with a spatula at the foot of the sufferer, because the matter that must be expelled must be expelled without leaving a residue; and if it escapes you, burn it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if sometimes the patient is pale and fearful, do not make the incision with iron; but rather wait for a recent bruise to form, and press firmly on that ailment; this is the way we have learned; and let it last for two days.</start_of_turn
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And so tighten the ligature of the bruise; therefore, do not stop pressing the bruise greatly until it is separated and falls off by itself.</start_of_turn
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	More than if it is of great root, the disease is a cause of fear and terror, especially in the belly.</start_of_turn
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you will have to make an incision of great extent, and then burn that to prevent it from returning.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And so care for the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And remember that you should not presume to make an incision of that which is of dark color, of little sensation, of little regard, for that which is abscess is pus.</start_of_turn
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I remember that I have seen this many times before.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lii.	End of Document.</start_of_turn
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of great importance concerning the navel.</start_of_turn
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The navel is useful for many causes; or for tears of the pericardium which is over the belly, and these are covered with the tissue or the bubble according as it happens in other ruptures; or for healing which flows from veins or arteries as it is said above, or for congestion caused by excessive wind.</start_of_turn
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	More than if for a tear of the pericardium and for swelling of the tissue, the color of the ailment is similar to the color of the body; and it is like a lion in its pain, and appears in various positions.</start_of_turn
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the discharge of the bubble, the situation of that which we have recounted is of more diverse situations; and as you have already said concerning the things which we have hidden, return it; and it is of great force in it, and is magnificent without causing any damage to the intestines or excessive work.</start_of_turn
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	May it be known that when humidity increases, it is not hidden when I press my hand onto your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it painful.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for safety, when I touch your skin, I do not cause swelling or discoloration to appear.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	May it be known that if it is for flesh, the pain is great, bulky and hard, and persists according to its quantity.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	May it be known that if it is for wind, the pain touches you like a lion.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you must consider the pain if the prominence of the navel is for the safety of the intestines, or of the veins, or for the wind; for in this case you must abstain from the care of the limb, for in this case there is fear and pain just as I have taught you in the chapter where I said about the swelling of the intestines and veins.</end_of_turn>
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is for the intestine or for the skin, the physician must command the patient to lie still and extend; and I order you to touch the circumference of the navel with your hand, and order him to stay between your thighs, and I order you to encircle the circumference of the navel around the area where you have touched; and I order you to stretch the greater part of the swelling towards the lower parts of the body with one hand; and I order you to support the circumference with a firm or soft hand and with good handling.</end_of_turn
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And I order you to uncover the tip of the swelling that is extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that place and grasp the intestine; and if you have grasped it neither held for the ligament, the pain will come out and push the intestine outwards of the belly.</end_of_turn
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have grasped the skin, the pain will take hold of you once; and burn the superfluous parts of it.</end_of_turn
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	May it be known that if it is contrary to your intestines or veins, the pain will surround this movement, and I order you to return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong fields and enter two needles into the circumference which you have made around the swelling in the manner of a cross, which shall penetrate; and I order you to strengthen the swelling in four parts over the needles.</end_of_turn
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and lie down until the fleshy extension falls down by itself; or burn that when it is subtle and it falls down, and I order you to care for that which covers the intestines until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is for flesh in it or for humidity, the physician must command the swelling to be reduced just as we have said and extract the safety or the humidity, which you find in it, and I order you to care for that which covers and consolidates the area.</end_of_turn
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 63.</end_turn>
De curacio de cranc.	Of the care of inflammation.</end_turn>
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the species of inflammation and how it is proper to care for it with medicines, and that it is dangerous to care for it with iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have said that inflammation is engendered in the marrow and must be treated with caution.</end_of_turn
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients say that some inflammations of the joint are in places where it is impossible to eradicate them, just as in the breasts or in the groin and in the vicinity of the limbs that are allocated to expel all that, and more so when it begins small.</end_of_turn
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	May it be known that when it is ancient and is grave, do not attempt to touch it, for I have never seen that it can be healed by any means, neither by medicine nor by any other, nor by anything that has reached me.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in this case is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile some herbs, and I order you to care for that, if it is found to be useful in replacing the visible symptoms.</end_of_turn
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And I order you to prepare the patient with the preparation in which he is located in the operation, and I order you to place on the wound a bandage which covers the area; and I order you to evacuate all the bowels from the belly until no remains any cause of the cause of the inflammation.</end_of_turn
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And lie down the safety, and do not burn it hastily, and press the areas, and wipe away the safety with your hand or with the instrument which is convenient to you.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	May it be known that if you do contrary to safety by burning the veins or the intestines, the pain will cauterize that until the flow of safety is stopped, and I order you to care for that which remains of the other care until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .liv.	Capitol.liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Capital.liv.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of dropsy of the water, and their signs, as well as the treatment of them with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the species of althites alone, and is not approached by iron to the species of tympanists or to the species of hippocresses, which is mortal
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of dropsy of tympanists with medicines and do not confirm your medicine, then consider that if the patient has already achieved debility due to this, or is suffering from another disease, then indeed in him or in his belly and around these things, you must keep in mind that you should not give him iron, for fear of that
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	May be sometimes the patient has excessive vomiting, and it is not another disease but only simple dropsy, neither young nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you raise his belly up between your thighs, and hold his abdomen with your hand, fill the water to the part beyond the navel, and take sponges according to this method:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	either of two sharp tongues long, or of sharp extremity thus as sponges; however, let it be little by little in each, so that in the operation there does not pass into the belly, and that you see that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider also if the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, because in that case you must remove the navel from the belly for the quantity of three fingers beyond the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	However, if the generation of dropsy is from kidney disease, then your incision should be to the left of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is from the spleen, then your incision should be at the flanks
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your incision be over the rib where the patient is vomiting, so as not to cause the fluids to run to that place
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And pierce with the instruments all the corden, and enter into that incision, and raise your hand with the sponge between the corden and the intestines, and drain that; and if there is the quantity of a nail or two.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And pierce the sac until the sponge reaches the place where the water is
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And extract that and insert an instrument of this shape
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	which is like a silver cannula; it is made of silver or lead or gold, and in the lower part of it is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its use is to pierce according to the manner of a pen, as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the extremity of it is an arm, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately releases so much water that if you evacuate more than this in an hour, it will cause great harm to the patient for the resolution of the spirit animal, or injuries to the five senses which is close to death
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	However, evacuate according to the quantity of the vomit and according to what you understand from the patient’s disposition of the vomit and of the state of his body.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And extract the instrument, and retain the water which is the cause of this, because it is retained by the corden which retains the hole that is over the sac from which we have recommended that you pierce according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days in fear, and take care that there remains no water except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you are afraid of the patient, and you see a great quantity of water, then cure that which you must bury in fine sand, and bathe his wound in bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and cure that which you must give drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the kidney at the time of the extraction of the water, as I have recounted above in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Capital.lv
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born with unperfected urinary tract locations.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are like this from the womb of their mother and the head of their bladder is not perforated (or is very narrow or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore cover the area around the perforation as much as possible so that it is born without significant spurting according to this method.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And immediately suspend the bleeding with a plum stone weight and tie it, and keep it for three days or for four
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when you have finished urinating, remain for a while and urinate again; and then return it
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not suspend the bleeding, it is possible that the urine that flows over the area will not collect in this bladder
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	More severe than this, that from which the bleeding originates is treated with a plum weight, as we have already said, for three days before it is aggravated
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	More severe still are those in which the bleeding does not originate in the bladder, that is to say, the cause is that of those, the one that is natural is that the bleeding arises from the end of the bladder so that it cannot urinate downwards; until you elevate the bladder with your hand to the upper parts; and this is not its normal condition, for in this case the sperm is unable to reach its height according to the rule, and this is a bad disease of the bladder.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The manner of performing the operation in this case is that the patient is placed face down on the two hips, and you extend the head of the bladder with your left hand with violent extraction, and you pierce the head of the bladder at the location of the periosteum with a sharp instrument, as if it were pierced with a needle, or that you do not tear away any part, for so the semen remains like the head of the bladder and the bleeding falls into the proper place as we have covered.</start_of_turn>
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember that in the performance of this operation of bleeding, that many times accidents happen; and suspend the operation when you have closed the bladder, and care for the wound until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .lvi.	End of document.</start_of_turn
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Concerning the abortion that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the bladder and the corruption, necrosis and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the bladder.</start_of_turn
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times these accidents happen in the bladder and are an eminent cause of lameness.</start_of_turn
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And from these two there is one that is malignant and one that is not malignant.</start_of_turn
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, for in this case you suspend with a single weight and close that when it is whole; and immediately suspend over that cavity submerged in Egyptian unguent; and do so until that is also healed.</start_of_turn
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abortion is malignant, of dark color, then you must administer pointed cautery nearby the incision and in the ratio of the lesion.</start_of_turn
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	More severe still, if the abortion is in the prepuce at the head of the bladder and is not circumcised, and one part of the abortion is downwards the prepuce and the other part is outwards, then you must know that you must leave the abortion that is downwards until it is consolidated; and you must care for the one that is outwards, for when you have cared for that, even though you have cared for the downwards one, you are not certain that it has not been fractured.</start_of_turn
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And these days there are accidents in the genitals and in the prepuce of necrosis, corruption and blackening, where you must know that you must remove everything that is already blackened and that is about to become corrupted or that is already corrupted; and immediately suspend over that area with the aforementioned salve, which is composed of a mixture of millet flour and burnt hair, and barley flour and blood of nightshade.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And care for the other until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is bleeding of the bladder, then you must administer lunar cautery as follows:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the lunar cautery has two positions together, that is, bleeding of the bladder and the corruption of the wound when it is corrupted.</start_of_turn>
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the bladder is corroded and is destroyed in an hour, then you must insert into the body of the prepuce a a plum catheter so that the patient can urinate through that.</start_of_turn
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the bladder (and this adhesion does not happen except in the case of the one in which the prepuce is soft, and over that it is not required to perform circumcision; and when it happens by wound or by abscess) you must scrape with a blunt object until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the bladder is freed throughout.)
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove them completely, you must scrape with a blunt object over the head of the bladder and the prepuce, and help so that when the prepuce is soft, it is easily perforated by its softness.)
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And so separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis, the one which is already swollen in the cold water because it does not adhere to any other hair.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And do so with a cautery until it is solidified
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 77
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Concerning the care of children and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to all ailments, just as other diseases: more importantly, however, in children, since it is done of our own free will and for their own good, it is necessary that we assign in this operation a greater care and less suffering for the child.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in their laws, because they did not use it, and it is only because we have learned through experience that the greatest part of physicians and barbers use circumcision for the novice and the barbarous; and they do so with thread and with an incision at the nail
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I myself have tried all these methods and I do not believe that there is a better circumcision than with forceps, with thread and with a faithful grasp of the nail, because with these methods the codena escapes more easily, because the cord of the prepuce is doubled, and the tension remains better, and it is less painful
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in digital circumcision which is useful for alphbetization, and which is practiced by the barbers, the incision of the extremity of the member is not followed, for it is strong enough to enter through the opening of the member
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	More in the operation with the nail, attention must be paid to iron and corrupt your operation
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and often it is not necessary to perform circumcision in this way, and I have seen cases where this has been the case
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the circumcision done with forceps and thread and faithful, the better, experiment has shown me that the forceps are in proportion to the incision, because the pain that results from the former is as great as the pain that is left; and therefore when you place your hand in proportion to these two pains, you make an incision according to a comparison in a time; and it is useful to compress the thread with a figure containing the entire cord of the penis, to which there is no error of any kind.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first method is that you must keep the child still if he is young, and if he is old you must only lie the thread in his penis alone, and you must read him to sleep within the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And so do that with all your ability so that he may receive his intelligence
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And so do that with your hands placed calmly prepared, and do not be stupid; and hide the forceps in your hand or put them in his foot, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And so put your hand on the penis and blow on the cord, and pull that until the head of the penis is withdrawn, and then perform that which is added to it from the moisture.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And so tie a loop with the thread doubled, and then tie another loop below that one, and then place your thumb and index finger on the back of the penis and indicate the place where you want to make the incision, and make the incision between the two threads
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And so elevate the cord gently and pull out the head of the penis; and read to him to keep still, for it is better; and when the powder has settled down, place a swab of lint on the wound where there is blood with congealed blood in watery urine containing oil of rosemary recently boiled; and leave that on until the next day; and care for it until it is healed
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps for circumcision is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The one that is not curved at the tail and the other is curved, that it does not reach the root of the claw, and that the length of the two points is as great as the length of two fingernails together
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More an error in circumcision is that it causes the excision of the entire intrinsic cord or part of it from the incision
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore take your time with your hand and with your nail before the apostemaction of the area and make the incision according to equality
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot take it with your nail, take it with your thumb and make the incision there
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	More if three days have passed, and the swelling of the penis has subsided, then you must read to him when it is convenient to make the incision, and remove the clot with ease, and make the incision as you are prepared
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Keep your head still, for it will not help you.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore take care of that which is at the root of the disease that has been recommended in the treatise on humors.</end_of_turn>
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is necessary to make an incision according to measure, and you obey the orders, then it will not cause them any harm.</end_of_turn
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which we have said is necessary for their recovery.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the care of retained urine in the bladder.</end_of_turn
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by excessive fullness due to stones or sand, or by poverty or carbuncles, and it is similar to what we have said concerning the methods of treatment in the division.</end_of_turn
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see that the retention is due to stones that are already in the neck of the bladder, then you must order that the patient be encouraged to walk around for a while.</end_of_turn
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then put the patient's feet on the bed of the sickroom and extend the lower limb from the hip downwards, and the patient will strain out the stone as much as possible.</end_of_turn
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore when the stone is expelled from the bladder through the posterior parts, the urine will be perfectly clear.</end_of_turn
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as we have said, and it appears that this is the cause of the disease, then you must administer the extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which is like this: made of silver or bronze, with a needle like a barleycorn about half as long, to which is attached a tube of about the same length.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting the urine from the patient is that you take the loop of the tube and bind it at the exit of the bladder with good ligature; then you introduce the loop of the tube into the cavity through the opening of the bladder, and remove any excess by means of forceps, but do not insert the needle too deeply. And then tighten the bladder around the tube and around the hub of the needle.</end_of_turn
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And do the patient sit on the edge of the bed, and bandage the bladder and the groin with oil and wool, and olive oil and vinegar.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then withdraw the needle slowly so that it does not cause any pain; then bend the bladder downwards towards the navel; then grasp the tube with your thumb and index finger; and finally grasp the bladder itself with your other hand. When the needle has passed through all these layers, the patient will feel relief from the pain, and this is not in vain according to this order, but in the place where there was previously pain, there will be no more.</end_of_turn
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And slowly pull out the tube with the urine, so that the urine does not irritate the bladder.</end_of_turn
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Thus extract and care for the urine, and use a siringua, do not cease to do so until the bladder is empty and the patient experiences relief from the pain.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.</end_of_turn
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the qualities of the clamp and instruments for bladder irrigation that are suitable for this purpose.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or swelling in the bladder, or sand, or if the bladder is narrowed by a stone, and you wish to instill water and medicines, then it is necessary to use a clamp to hold the opening of the bladder. This is how it is made:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	So if the bladder neck is deaf, it is closed.</end_of_turn
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three parts to it: two from one side, thus as many times.</end_of_turn
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is the loop with the liquid which is to be instilled, and as much as it covers that, so much more is added, until when any cause is overcome by this, that is to say, when it is expelled, it is expelled along with the liquid, and when it is expelled long, as the clamp holds that which is in the bowels of the sea.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to instill liquid in the bladder, insert the clamp into the liquid and draw out that liquid which is in the bladder, because the liquid is expelled from the cavity of the clamp.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the clamp into the neck of the bladder according to what has been said concerning the siringua; and grasp the liquid with the clamp, because that liquid will reach the bladder in this way, and the patient will experience relief from the pain in this way.</end_of_turn
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The bladder is crystallized in the shape of a prism.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether it is caused by silver or lead, of which the head has more, or resembling a small pen, leave it as it is, bound by ligament.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder steadily, and suspend the humidity you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and then bind that between two strong ligatures, and heat that humidity over the fire.</end_of_turn>
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then pull out the extremity of the prism into the groove.</end_of_turn
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then open your hand over the bladder with the humidity that has been stretched out so that the patient does not feel that humidity has already reached the bladder.</end_of_turn>
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If there is no bladder present, then take a piece of sponge and make a circle of it; pierce that through its entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread firmly through those holes, even if they are revolting; and then join the circle again as it is joined to the sponge, because you rest in that water which you take from the humors, and oil and water.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then bind that in the instrument as you did with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lx.	The treatise ends here.</end_of_turn>
De extraccio de peyra.	From the extraction of the stone.</end_of_turn>
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of stones and their care with medicines, and the difference between a stone engendered in the humors and a stone engendered in the bladder, and we will remind you of that.</end_of_turn
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said the stone in which catz operation is made with the hand, and section.</end_of_turn
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone engendered in the bladder itself is that which is left in the bladder.</end_of_turn
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And thus we have narrated that which is the exhibition and abreviation.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the stone which is engendered in the greater bladder mostly appears in childhood; and concerning its signs, that the urine which is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its transparency, and appears in that sand; and the patient often has frequent pain in his groin, and swelling in the legs, and is dressed; and in that water there is found in the stool of those.</end_of_turn
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is laughable the healing of the children of that until they have reached thirteen years; and it is difficult to cure them in the old.</end_of_turn
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More easily in the young than in the old.</end_of_turn
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that of which the stone is greater and the care is lighter; and if it is little, it is contrary to that.</end_of_turn
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we come to the cure of that, we must begin by making modification to the patient's pain by extracting all the pus that is in the abscesses that are in the groin; for that abscess with many swellings hinders the infection of the stone due to the inquiry of these.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And thus be present the patient with the groin pain and sit with knees bent and feet up so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or that some swellings may jump from place.</end_of_turn
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And thus do that which is between your thighs prepared, and the greater part of them leave the cushions of their thighs, so that the entire bladder is made to lean downwards towards the parts behind.</end_of_turn
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And thus require that and all that surrounds it.</end_of_turn
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, the hour you cover it so much with incision over it.</end_of_turn
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel it all, leave it touched slightly, and put oil on it as an indication of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or say half if it is a complete youth, and insert that into the groin.</end_of_turn
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And require of the stone until it is left touching it.</end_of_turn
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the belly of the bladder.</end_of_turn
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And thus place your hand over that which you touch, and expel that to the outside beyond the location from which you made the incision.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the minister to hold the bladder with his hand; and command another minister with his right hand to extend the buttocks to the outside, and with his left hand to compress the cord which is left by the buttocks, in the part of the place where the incision is made.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And immediately insert the spatula, since this is its shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And immediately insert the spatula, since this is its shape. Split it between the hip and the knee, not in the middle of the limb, towards the outer side of the left thigh; and make the incision over the heel of the foot and the heel itself. Make a transverse incision, so that the outer incision is wide and the inner incision is narrow according to the quantity of pus that comes out of the foot, and do not make it larger, for that would compress the heel that is in the buttock.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from the foot there is some angle and margin, for that its essence is difficult to grasp by that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that pus there is something like slime, which is round, and it is the cause of its lightness.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if it is that from which there are angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus forced, then you must hold that limb above that, or strengthen it above that limb conveniently, the limb which is like that to the limb which you strengthen over the foot, and do not neglect it; or that you insert your instruments under the curved limb.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Or if you cannot do that, then expand the wound a little, and if you see discharge of pus, cut off the violent vomiting.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Or if the foot is larger than one, then immediately put your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and immediately insert the spatula over it; and immediately push out a little of the pus; and do the same if there are clots of pus larger than two
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	Or if the foot is large, it is known that by making a great incision, two things happen to the patient: either that it is left there or that it causes the continuous dripping of urine, for which reason the limb is not completely consolidated
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Or administer the evacuation of the pus that is outside, or engineer the fracture of the limb with forceps until you extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe leaves and dragon's blood, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And rest upon that limb immersed in oil and vinegar, or in scented oil and warm water, so that the cautery will be softened
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And keep the patient lying down on the side, and do not remove the dressing until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has gone, bathe the limb with water and oil, and care for that limb with ointment and diazepam until it is healed
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Or if there is pus in the wound after the cautery, adhere and dissolve it, for if there is urine in the bladder (and that is known as the evacuation of the bladder), then immediately remove the heel of the foot from the wound and extract that pus, for if it remains it will cause the corruption of the bladder and its decay.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And finally wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and against all spices, with oil that will facilitate its healing.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And keep throughout the treatment that you lie both thighs together and adjust the medicines that are placed on the limb.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the foot is small and is in the heel of the foot, and is fixed there, and the evacuation of urine is prohibited, then it is known that the treatment must be prolonged, for this treatment is accused of cutting; and already I have mentioned that, and it is that you take a needle of iron to perforate it, of which this is the shape.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Triangular, extended, acute, fixed in flesh.</start_of_turn>
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And immediately take hold, and keep that limb so that the foot does not return to the bladder.</start_of_turn>
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And immediately insert the needle into the heel, perforating easily until the needle comes out at that foot
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the needle in your hand over that small foot, and you will perforate the wound until you have passed that of the other part to penetrate; for the urine will be discharged completely.</start_of_turn>
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And immediately put your hand over that which is remaining of the foot of the heel, which is tornated, and is forced by the urine, and the patient is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Or if this treatment does not please you for any cause that hinders you, then immediately tie a thread around the foot and another thread untie the foot.</start_of_turn
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then remove the ligament and restore the limb with ointment, which is useful in the plague
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And do not ligate the vein, but only that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligate only when it is detached, because when it is detached the vein immediately resumes its course and causes the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason when you have detached the vein, elevate the limb above the level of the bladder, or that it returns backwards through the belly, and cause the plague as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	End of text.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	From the extraction of stones from the thighs.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in the thighs are rarely engendered
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If however one sees stones in any of these, it is difficult to cure them, and it is prohibited by experienced physicians.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the strong thigh is pregnant.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The other is that you do not find the stone unless it is expelled by the patient when it is cast out by the physician, or is from women who have had intercourse
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find the stone unless you are taught this art, especially the operation with the hand
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth is that the place of the incision concerning the stone in the thighs is far from the place of the stone, because it indicates danger of incision, and in that there is fear
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If however necessity compels you to do so, take a large stone that is well known, and little is found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you have none of these, take a large stone that is almost white, or present a matron woman who has been proven in the art, or a woman who in this art has given birth easily
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So present her and command her to do everything that you order her, from the inquiry concerning the stone from the beginning; for the reason is to learn if the woman is pregnant, for the hour that she puts all this aside and wants the stone
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If you find it, cover that with what you have said, and command her to mark upon that place
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not a virgin, command the matron to insert what you have said into the belly of the patient and take hold of the stone, because she places her left hand over the bladder, and confirm that there.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if you find it, gradually pull that out from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts until you reach that which is at the root of the cause
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And immediately mark upon that spot where the cause has been stopped and center the stone in that place, so that the hand does not remain near the stone any more.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The incision should be slight at the beginning; and immediately insert the instrument over that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the quantity that you know the stone will be expelled by that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You know that the species of stones are many: some are few and large, some are like lion's stones and rough, some are long and round, and some have ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you must know what species they are that you are signifying about what you wish
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the soaked cloth tightly and hold it for an hour until the bleeding has ceased, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make ready all your instruments which are said in the extraction of stones from the thighs, so that you may be helped in your operation by these people.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of the blood comes from the artery that is pierced, then you must stop the powder over the place and open that part more widely, and do not do anything further; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for that will cause the patient to die
E aprop cura la plagua.	Take care of the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the acute pain of the blood has subsided a little after a few days, and the limb has become soft, then you return to your operation until the stone is expelled
Capitol lxii.	Capital lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Capital lxii.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Capital lxii.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Capital lxii.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	Capital lxii.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	Capital lxii.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Capital lxii.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	Capital lxii.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	Capital lxii.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	Capital lxii.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Capital lxii.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Capital lxii.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Capital lxii.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Capital lxii.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Capital lxii.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Capital lxii.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Capital lxii.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Capital lxii.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Capital lxii.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Capital lxii.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	Capital lxii.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	Capital lxii.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa in olio o in olio rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa in vi e olio, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius et mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz et pulvils, et lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon tal forma.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And now take two cloths and fill them with wet lancets according to this pattern; and make points on the parts where coto or lancets are put, and add them to the structure in the groin of the thighs, and one of the extremities before the heel enters the two, and the other before the heel of the knee, and two extremities over two toes and two extremities on two ankles, and adjust all the structures in the groin of the thighs.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And thus this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery in place of an incision with a knife; and take a pointed cautery and insert it into the codena of the genitals, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white sac containing the urine is discovered, and then take the cautery in this way:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and make a Greek cross.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that sac, and ignite until all the moisture is driven out
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then stretch the sac with forceps, and scour with forceps, and scour with the pointed cautery ignited; and insert that as you are able until you have evacuated all of it; and keep away from the fire that the flame does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and more lengthy than an incision with a knife, and better than an operation with a section
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	More than if in the act of incision or in the act of cautery, or flux of oil, know that you must take care of whatever discomfort arises to you in this matter, with the care that you are accustomed to give to them as it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	More than if the patient is poor, and does not expect a second operation because of its horror, know that you must perform the perforation as I have recommended above; and that is when it is confirmed that indeed this hernia is harmless.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Know that you must place the patient upon any elevated surface, and perforate the apostema in the lower part of the limb at the side of the palm of the hand, and stop the perforation according to the length of the limb.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to drain out all the urine
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place over the place the coto and tie that and leave that, so that the urine remains there
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care that the wound is healed
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	More than if there is resistance to the flow of urine at that moment you perforate that: and that is not useful except for the fact that the white puss in the orifice of the wound makes resistance to the flow of urine, while you must prevent the flow of urine from coming out; in this case you must extract the urine from the bladder in some way; or you must adjust in the oppression of the wound a small instrument with which the urine is extracted from the bladder, the form of which is preceded.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the urine returns, and is increased about six months or in the springtime; and when it is increased, the perforation must be repeated according to that manner, for the patient will pass the stone in those days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 163.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of the incision concerning carnosa hernia and the care of them
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision concerning this hernia there is fear of permanent damage in the greatest facilities; for I have seen the diminution of them and their being saved in that manner
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in which and the species of the apostemas
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the apostemas arise in the thighs of which the genetius are composed and is useful for many causes: or for an acute inflammation that is spread to the genetius, or for percussion
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the apostema is according to the color of the limb, and is not found in pain, and is a difficult apostema
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the soft apostema, of which the color is dark, is not centiment to it
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is useful for the nodulation of the arteries, and for inflammation of those as well as when the memory of them has already been perceived, or for inflammation of veins
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The swelling of the joints is known as gout when it is caused by the discharge of purulent matter from the bladder when it is pressed in the abdomen. It does not matter if that touch is applied.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The swelling of the veins is not dispersed by any cause by the compression of those that are said.</end_of_turn>
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that in this case the cutting will be sufficient, and concerning the other parts; and that you insert the codena of the genetia, and then stretch out the blood vessels under the skin, extract that from the white pith, discharge the lymph from the vessels, and ligate them, and insert more lymph than you discharge from the whole of the blood vessels.</end_of_turn>
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the blood has already solidified in those parts, then you must extract it and insert it.</end_of_turn
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adherence from any cause between the bones, or between the vessels, then you must discharge all that adherence and insert it by incision around.</end_of_turn
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is birth from flesh in the place of the adherence that is behind, then you must insert all that is of it, and extract the blood as we have said.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is finished, then fill the wound with soft wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and take care of the other care until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the care of hernias that are of this kind.</end_of_turn
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The purulent matter is enveloped by any covering similar to a sprout with mollification of the testicles, and it is difficult for the patient to exercise and walk on the affected side.</end_of_turn
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the care of this disease is to be careful of what precedes the recollection.</end_of_turn
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However we must say the operation in the second place.</end_of_turn
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you must raise the patient onto a high cushion; and then stretch out the lymph vessels of the testicles to the lower parts; and then insert the codena of the genetia into the abdomen with the veins that are to be opened; and hold those other attendants who you have, and extend those with violent extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And insert with a sharp knife across the edge of the vessels until the vessels are revealed.</end_of_turn
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And extract from the whole of the body as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.</end_of_turn
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And leave in those a needle that is firm and double, and ligate that at the first place where the wound happened, and ligate the other vein at the end of them.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And insert again in the middle of the body for a transverse incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is added of the foul and corrupt humors.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And take care of the wound with the care of the other wounds in which you wish to generate that the veins which accompany one of the two testicles, which is not bad for what.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	However if the veins have all happened, then you must extract the testicles or that the testicles because of the veins, because it is private of all nourishment for the incision of the veins, and that they are established, or that they are equal so that they are not harmful to those.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.</end_of_turn
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the care of intestinal hernias.</end_of_turn
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by incision that extends over the abdomen from the flanks of the navel to the navel, so that the intestines of that rupture are included among the intestines.</end_of_turn
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the pericardium or of excess of it, and it happens for various causes: or for percussion, or for vomiting, or for crying, or for elevation of any serious cause, or for some other reason.</end_of_turn
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is for extension of the pericardium, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and is purulent engalls inside the belly so that the pericardium compresses the intestine.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is for incision of the pericardium, that at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is purulent different from the apparent one because of the proximity of the wound to the apparent one, and that is because of the swelling of the intestine, and the body of the hernia to the parts surrounding the pericardium.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Every wound that is outside the belly is forgotten at the hernia of the intestines, and is called such an intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Every wound is caused by the wind, and some wounds enter the belly through a wound, and here it is retained, and it is great pain for the patient, and some wounds cause great pain that is greater when it is disturbed
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the care of this disease there is fear, for that it covers that it should be avoided in this place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way of performing this operation is that you command the patient to reduce the belly with his hand to the parts around the circumference if he obeys your return order, and then you must be covered over the heel between your thighs, and elevate the legs of the patient.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the tendon which joins the testicles to the parts below, and cut the tendon of the testicles throughout; and then fix in two places the edges of the incision according to what you must do to open the incision with these things.</start_turn>
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is done as much as you can, that from that one will be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove the blood clots which are left from the tendon of the testicles, until the white hard substance of some part is discovered.</start_turn
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you will enter the gut called in that which is between the testicles, in which is between the white substances, which is left from the tendon of the blood, and between the substances that are following, and remove whatever adhesion is in the part behind the blood.</start_turn
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then put your hand on the tendon of the testicles to the parts outside, and with your left hand stretch the white substance outwards, and elevate the blood to the part of the incision; and command the minister to stretch the blood outwards and you will dissolve the adhesion that is behind with the solution accomplished.</start_turn
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek in the guts that there is no cause for the belly covered in the white hard substance.</start_turn
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	May it be that you find in them some cause, however, you will leave it inside the belly.</start_turn
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And take a needle in which is strong enough to make four holes, and enter with it that which must be left under the tendon of the testicles, which is the incision; and when you have pierced as far as four holes, then join the ends that you have pierced so that they make a cross; and tie with it the part from which we have said that the tendon of the testicles is left with strong thread of two parts.</start_turn
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then cover the ends of the holes and tie them with strong thread until some of the blood vessels that nourish them do not cause any cause so that nothing bad comes from here.</start_turn
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And wait another wound like the first wound, long of it less three times; and when you have put two threads that lie outside the belly that is left from the tendon of the testicles as much as the size of the thumb, and pierce all that remains round about, and keep the blood inside.</start_turn
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then pierce behind the tendon of the testicles for the incision from which blood runs freely and safely as we have recommended that we have said.</start_turn
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer lard submerged in oil, and cover in the wound; and administer the thread that we have recommended (for some wounds the white substance of the blood is cauterized, which we have said above to be the fear of the flow of blood, for many wounds happen that these things happen).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the case is delayed, the cold water should be covered, and cover on that until it falls as we have said.</start_turn
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound with the other care of wounds until it is healed.</start_turn
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.</start_turn>
De hernia ventosa.	Of intestinal hernia.</start_turn
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia nothing has been seen that has been omitted in its care with the iron.</start_turn
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing they say is that it is useful just as we have recommended in the hernia that is in the living; which is that you tie the blood vessels near the incision so that the intestines can be facilitated; and then dry in the middle of the wound around the feces so that the feces can be released through that, until the blood vessels fall down.</start_turn
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Take care of the wound as we have said until it is healed.</start_turn
Capitol .lxvii.	Capitol .lxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Capital . lxvii.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some veins become broken in the joints as we have said before, and we must examine the area
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not cause any injury to the veins of the geneius; and if you must, that is little; and return it quickly in all its entirety
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	May be if it is prolonged for a long time at this point, an incision must be made in the abdomen until the intestine returns to its cavity; and this is done because the abdomen is extended because of the pain in the joints as we have said before, which causes the abdomen to be distended, and we must soften the area and place our hand over it to prevent the intestine from coming out
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of them is like this, as soon as the story of them is finished
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And every vein is cured like this: and that the patient sits on the seat of two between your hands, and then dry the area of the break of the apostemas we have mentioned before with a piece of cloth of the width of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white abdomen that is under the navel until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place it over the prominent area of the abdomen, and press that to the navel
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then compress the two prominent areas on the extremity of the ray of the abdomen, and tie one to the other with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not injure the intestines of any kind, neither extend the blood, nor any other cause as I will tell you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then care for that like the treatment of wounds, and when incisions are made, soften that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the abdomen is contracted and the prominence of the break is not adjusted
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And sitting is better in this place, for it is more likely to be healthy
Capitol .lxviii.	Capital . lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the navel of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many veins the navel of the testicles in the cold season is softened to help soften the flesh that is between those and is feared for that reason
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When it is necessary to do so in the treatment of these it makes the patient sit on the seat of two, and cut all the navel which is softened over the natural navel; and then tie two lips together with a suture
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, you can also ligate the excess of the softened navel with three or four stitches and a firm suture
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then make incisions between the sutures; and then care for the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds fall off
Capitol .lxix.	Capital . lxix
De castracio.	Of castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Wise men say that castration is forbidden in our law, however, I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except for two reasons, of which one is that the physician should know how to cure it when he is asked about it, since he knows how to cure it; and the other reason is that we often have need to castrate other beasts for our youth, for those such as dogs, and sows, and pigs, and the like.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is useful in two ways: either by traction or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	May be in that in which it is useful by traction, the way of the operation is that we must cut off the beast in cold water until the testicles are softened and limp and hanging down
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take hold of them with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to touch each other
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May be in castration useful by incision and section, cover that you have the beast and grasp the navel of the testicles of it with your left hand
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then ligate the surgeon, and make an incision over every vein with a section so that two veins protrude.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then make incisions of those which are more likely to be excoriated
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not neglect any cause of the abdomen of any kind, but only the abdominal fat which is over the veins
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than that which is for attrition, because attrition strongly preserves any cause of the testicles, since the beast desires to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And take care of the plague until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 60.</end_of_turn
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the care of hermaphroditism.</end_of_turn>
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two methods: one is when or appears that the space between the testicles is cut in two in the space between two testicles there appears what looks like a woman in which there are seeds.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And there are many who urinate from that which is in the space of the testicles.</end_of_turn
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	More is a kind in women: and it is that the thumb of the hand is like two testicles of a man a little wide and narrow at the root like two testicles of a man.</end_of_turn
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the care is of three kinds: two of the men and one of the women.</end_of_turn
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And that you keep those parts pressed until the mark of that is gone, and that you take care of those with care for other diseases.</end_of_turn
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men from which urine comes from the space of the testicles, there is neither care nor operation in them.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.</end_of_turn
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of languor and fat of high rank for the causes of women.</end_of_turn
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Strong languor is adjusted on natural causes until it is tormented and is good to look at it regularly; and there are many who are magnified in many women as much as in men and even when they are together.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore keep the excess of languor with your hand or with one hand and press it.</end_of_turn
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop, mainly in the armpit, so that there is no leakage of urine.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And take care of that which is cared for the diseases until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More fat is born fat that does not exist in the horror of the mother until it fills that one, and strong fat is ejected from the roots according to the manner of the dog (and for that reason they call it the first disease). Therefore keep it so that we scratch it just as we scratch the languor, and care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 62.</end_of_turn
De curacio de alratica.	Of the care of the wound.</end_of_turn
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	A wound is that which does not pierce the skin, or that has a small hole.</end_of_turn
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.</end_of_turn
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is by a disease that has preceded it, or that is caused by fat or by an external or internal wound.</end_of_turn
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is found on the mother's belly, or on the sides, or on the white of the eye, or on the black of the eye, and it forbids scratching and bruising and coitus, and strong fat forbids menstruation.</end_of_turn
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the recognition of that is good for the belly of the womb, if the swelling is apparent, it is enough; more if it is not apparent, then you seek that which is in the belly or in the side.</end_of_turn
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	More if the swelling is for an external wound, and is sufficient for two lips, then you can scratch and break that.</end_of_turn
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And that you rest over two lips the powder, and that you put your hand on the belly indicates that there is something more serious.</end_of_turn
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is over the hips two, the thighs stretched out, and then stretch out the two lips with force until that external wound is broken and the swelling is opened.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And take some wool and soak it in oil and put it on the area, and hold it with the hand of the man so that the wound does not solidify.</end_of_turn
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	More if the wound is thick and bloody, then keep that which is around the wound wet with palm oil or with ivy leaves.</end_of_turn
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May it be known that if the swelling is from flesh, then suspend that one, and prick that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And let the medicines be such as can stop the flow of blood, such as alum, and saffron, and oil, adjusted with vinegar.</end_of_turn>
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And give a wide needle of lead so that the wound is not solidified too much.</end_of_turn
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for a while and give a cold compress.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let the wound be treated with the other care of consolidation until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	For in many cases these things happen when the greater parts of other flesh are born, and the time that must be covered is in this manner.</end_of_turn
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	Indeed, if there is swelling of the head, the swelling of the head which is in the greater part should not be contrary to the iron in any way.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxxiii.	End of text.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the care of hemorrhoids and swelling of the tail and of red swelling that happen in the groin of women.</end_of_turn
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the veins of the buttocks until they reach those that carry blood continuously; and as they are ancient hemorrhoids and are formed they are healed.</end_of_turn
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and I have shown them to be those that receive care and those that do not receive care.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and swellings when they are in the groin of the greater part and do not appear to the feeling, the time in those is not to give iron care.</end_of_turn
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Indeed, those which are in the groin of the greater part concerning which there is sensation, those are cured.</end_of_turn
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And keep the woman in greater warmth and approach a thigh with rough towels or coarse wool, and prick them at the roots.</end_of_turn
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And sprinkle over those the blood flows from one of the incisions of the wound, as in the case of acacia and similar to that.</end_of_turn
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And keep the legs covered for an hour, and then stop that in cold water.</end_of_turn
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, the time will come to make decoction of gum and of poppy seeds and of gum and of fragrant herbs and of similar things.</end>
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And give oatmeal and comfort that with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with water over two of them.</end_of_turn
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is evacuated, it is good; otherwise, adhere to two sponges, and to the nipples its sacrifice.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And give sponge and immerse that in broth of marigold or in broth of rue or in broth of pomegranate with some vinegar and adhere to the place; and take care of the place until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Indeed, take care of the rough one concerning which I have said in the explanation of the ointment.</end_of_turn
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxxiv.	End of text.</end_of_turn
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of an abscess that happens in the groin.</end_of_turn
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are many kinds of abscesses that happen in the groin, such as carbuncle and abscess lapident and ulcerous and adhubelated and erpeting and fistula hemorrhoidal and raguaria and millet and other abscesses.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and the kinds of those and their symptoms, and their treatment in the division.</end_of_turn
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I say in this treatise of the abscess of the groin when it comes to the abscesses that collect blood, and if you want to know how to perform the operation of them with iron.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore you must consider if the pain of the abscess in the thigh at the beginning is acute with percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes when it covers itself and when you touch it there is no longer any feeling, the time is not to perforate it, and care for that which helps with the maturity until the acute of the accident is over.</end_of_turn
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And thus he commands that you cut the female organ above a navel that has two navels; recline on the seat and adjust your feet to the part beyond the belly, and your thighs will expand, and rest your arms beside your knees, and tie whatever you like to it conveniently.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And thus he follows the matrix following the bladder and administer the instrument with which he has opened the orifice of the great one, the shape of which will come in those cases that make it necessary.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And thus he commands that when you are administering this instrument, you remain close to the root of the female organ, and that what comes out of the instrument into the female organ be no more than the root of the female organ, and cause no harm to the patient
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the root of the female organ, he commands that you cover the texture of the root of the female organ with powder so that the insertion of any instrument into the root of the female organ is prohibited
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And he commands that you stop the vomiting that runs in the bladder after it has been used and that the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vomiting until it is opened up to the orifice of the great one.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the discharge comes out, which is grasped with the hand and is lean and slimy, he commands that you wipe away that which you must leave at the place with the sponge of lint
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the urine is evacuated, he commands that you place in the wound a soaked sponge in olive oil or green oil in which there is any irritation; and rest the heel on the section in the root of the female organ.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And rest the female organ and cover the wound with a clean cloth soaked in water in which are boiled mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And thus he commands that it be cured two days from today until tomorrow, when it is convenient to do so.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And many times the female organ is washed and the wound is cleansed that it is crystallized with water and honey, and then with water in which radish or long parsley is boiled, and then return to the enguent.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is delayed in the female organ by the fever, he commands that you do not use any other cure except that which has been said in the division
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 165
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the matrons how they should behave when they see a patient who is suffering from a non-natural condition.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the matron know at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth so that she will recognize the signs of it, for when a woman gives birth she expels the parts beyond the belly and desires to smell the air, and this is done because of what is above her, and she is tormented by this part, the hour she understands that this part is in a natural figure, and that is the sign of her head, and the second one is when it is hanging or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see these signs, he commands that the belly be pressed so that the embryo comes down slightly from the head, so that it will rest on the second one, and be protected from these superabundances with good management
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If another part is not natural and unusable, for when the embryo is ejected from its feet and the body of the fetus is ejected before the head of the fetus, and the hand or the foot of the fetus, or both, that is to say... or the head is ejected and the hand is ejected, or the belly of the fetus, and it is greatly converted on the navel, and it is similar to the figures that are not usable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary that the matron be wise and discreet in all these matters, and that she avoids error and deception
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And thus I have shown you all the figures of those things, and what is their meaning so that you may understand what it is and remain silent about it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus comes out naturally through the head, and that is violent on the woman and is done with difficulty, sometimes the virtue of the women is already exhausted, he commands that you do what the women have, and that you vaporize the knowledge of them with the fennel seed and with warm oil
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And thus he orders that the matron be interpolated between the thighs which are said to be spit out small and open that one or cut that one with her nail until it runs dry of the humidity that is in it
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until it comes down from the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it does not come out, he commands that the woman be cleansed with mucus of peas and fennel mucus with salt.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And command them to compress their belly and chest, and to hold their breath for an hour; and cover their mouth and nose with something so that they forget their pain for a while.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the pain in the foot has already subsided somewhat at the beginning, then command that you gradually reduce the pressure.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If they do not obey your instructions, then place the foot on a stool and lift their legs up, and then gently press the stool down so that the foot does not slip off the cushion
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the pain does not subside, then take hold of their foot and pull their limb toward your chest until the limb becomes limp, for the pain will be forgotten then.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From that moment until their legs are healed.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot is healed, then command that you gently massage their legs and make the foot small, and gradually engorge it, and take hold of one leg and gently extend the other limb little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are quiet within the space, then command them to expel their breath and make that they cough, for the pain will be forgotten if God wills it
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if the pain has not been forgotten as we have recommended, then command that you gradually return the limb to its natural position until you see that the pain has completely disappeared, for the pain will be forgotten by itself at that moment.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited in everything that we have recommended, then take a high dose of musellage of alum and dissolved gum, and prick all over the foot for a good bruise, and keep their hand on the area to prevent the pus from coming out of the wound.</start_of_turn>
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And do that for a lukewarm bath, until the swelling subsides.</start_of_turn>
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the limbs are softened, then command that you apply a fumigation of myrrh and take a pause for them.</start_of_turn
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When the fumigation has lasted for an hour, then command that you place it on a stool, and make them cough and open their mouth wide, and take away that, and press the lower part of the belly with your hand, applying some pressure, for the pain will be forgotten then.</start_of_turn
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	From that moment until the foot is healed on their legs and their limbs.</start_of_turn>
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foot has healed in this way, then command that you gradually move their smaller limbs; and that you place the foot on the heel of the leg and their legs on the ground, and that you support their limbs.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press gently on the belly little by little, and gradually extract what is left of the swelling from their ankles until it is ready in the lower part of the foot.</start_of_turn>
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the foot is not forgotten, then take hold of their foot and do not allow them any violent movement, and press what is above the joints little by little until the foot returns to its natural position.</start_of_turn
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually move their limbs and gradually engorge the foot, and command the hand to expel their breath until the foot is forgotten.</start_of_turn
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	When the foot is completely healed laterally while one of their limbs is still swollen.</start_of_turn
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Work on reducing their hand, even if you cannot achieve that, command that you lift the foot and make them walk.</start_of_turn
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If they cannot walk, then command that they sit on the ground, and support their limbs with a violent bruise, and administer to them the remedies that I have recommended and mucilages.</start_of_turn
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If they become angry, then command that they sit on a stool, and study how to reduce the hand, and gently engorge the foot according to its natural shape, and make them cough and command them to compress themselves until they are forgotten.</start_of_turn
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	When the foot is lying with the heel expanded, expand their limbs and the area of their foot is two-thirds of their height.</start_of_turn
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	And that the matron has the hand of the foot and gradually rotate that little by little, and make it easier.</start_of_turn
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it is as it should be and the foot is well-engorged, then command that you rest for a while on the area where we have recommended olive oil and mucilages.</start_of_turn
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command them to move their hand little by little, and when they feel better, command that they sit on a stool and tilt their head slightly forward, and command them to compress themselves; and make them cough so that they forget their pain.</start_of_turn
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared for birth on the wide side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother screams in agony like this, consider it, and when you pierce her with your finger until it evacuates the moisture
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and the side of the body, then pierce that of the navel, so that it is not retained and remains.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then pull the fetus towards the flanks until you reach the navel, and command the woman to press her thighs together, and if the sirrah has forgotten something essential, tell her immediately that she has forgotten it, because God or no
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	It is wise that twins born together with other vegetables are born alive; and some say that three or four are born at once, which is strange and seldom happens; however, this is not for lack of nature, but for life itself.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those who are multiplied, whether by one or more, and are separated by the navel cord from each of those who have been delivered, for each of those who are born together naturally forgets something as a fetus is naturally curious, and so there are some who are forgotten even though they are truly excellent.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, you must encourage them and persevere until we have mentioned the unnatural figures, for you must care for those as we have recounted
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skillful and does what is necessary to facilitate and expedite delivery, and is ingenious according to every figure according to what is prepared for her from the imminent danger of life.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some veins are formed in a woman one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, and sometimes nine times, and it is enough to verify that a woman has borne six times, and another nine times altogether, causing great pain due to measurement of the glorious scholars.</end_of_turn>
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And so it is necessary to know the science of the midwife that she is strong in that she can deliver such a multitude of children, and therefore she should be praised for that which she does so well
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 166.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it does not go out naturally, and you must use surgery with care, then you must consider whether the woman is of sound mind and not subject to any of the accidents for which she is feared to be in danger of miscarriage
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then you must cover the woman over her thighs with a sheet, and incline her head downwards and elevate her thighs.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister holds her by two parts or ties her with a sheet so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then wet the mouth of the mother with oil of lilies and mucus of elderberry and fennel and seed of rue.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife takes her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then helps her to hold her hand firmly in the mother's hand, and then she seeks with her hand in the place where the nails remain in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And look carefully in what place: when you consider that the fetus is ready to be born head first, and when you find the nails in the heel of the foot, or in the head, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the hair, or the tonsils, or the ribs, or in the proper places of the flanks, or leave the navel cord
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if it is delivered headfirst, when it is in the fifth or in the middle of the flanks
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Then hold the nail with your left hand, and suspend the curvature of the limb in that place where it is between the thumb and the little finger, and help her with your hand and stay with the nail in one of those places that we have mentioned, until the cause of pain comes.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And so stay close and remain in the position of the limb until another nail appears, or the third if necessary, so that it is an equal traction, and not an extension only as before
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	The joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrates the entire body, and when it affects the feet, doctors usually call it gout.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And cover them in it where there is between them that the extension is softened; and if any part of them is retained, then cover that the matron put an egg-shaped weight on the same side with oil and insert those expected to be expelled and rotate those that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the foot is extruded, then let the nails be cut between the places where it is pus; and do so until all of the foot is extruded
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is extruded from the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the support of the cushion, then cover that hand with a bandage; and extract that until all is extruded, and insert it either into the joint of the hand or into the wound
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus cover that the other hand and the two feet are covered as well.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the foot is great, or if it is afflicted with the support in the suffering, or if there is water adjusted in the head, then cover that you insert between these teeth the spicery and split the head and extract the water, or that you drain it with an instrument called “alundat”, the shape of which will be like the shapes of the other instruments in the capital which is similar to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And in the same way do if the foot is of great head by nature: and cover that you insert that sponge, or that you support that sponge just as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extruded and is supported behind the collarbone, cover that it is split until the humidity that is in the feet is evacuated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, or if it does not obey this suffering, then cover that you insert the head as much as possible according to your skill
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if there is swelling of the belly or if it is in hydrosis, cover that you perforate that until the humidity that is in it is expelled
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the foot is over the knees, the traction of it is light and the direction of it to the mouth of the thigh is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is supported behind the belly and the foot, cover that you extract that which has been wrapped around your hand, and split the belly and the foot until the water that is in them runs out
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are relaxed and the head is returned, the matron inserts the left hand; but if the mouth of the thigh is open, the matron inserts the hand into the groin, grasps the head, and pulls that which is said to go into the mouth of the thigh, and at the same time inserts one or two nails into it and pulls them out toward those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	But if the mouth of the thigh is closed by swelling caused by the cautery, cover that it is not beaten over it; and cover that you administer an effusion of oily humors.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and keep the patient in waters that soften and hydrate him.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	But if the foot is over the knee, if possible, is to be ligated: and to be administered what has been said of the foot living
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	But if that is not possible, cover that it is pierced in pieces, and that it is extracted<end_turn>
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And cover that you do not leave any cause of dizziness from the second time<end_turn>
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, cover that you administer what has been said of the care of the cautery which has happened to the thigh.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if an abscess occurs, cover that you drain in styptic waters and administer the other care.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And indeed I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom there was a dead foot, and I put another sponge over that one, and the other foot was dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to me or to someone long time postpartum in the belly; and it inflates until the foot or thigh is broken.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to their care, and I treated them for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed my hand over their chest, for there was a strong attraction and expulsion from there, and I passed my fingers over their body, and expelled another; and I was amazed that there was no swelling in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that these were the bones of the foot that had died.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I applied the poultice, and I extracted from them four bones, the fifth being in the heel which exists in thousands, and I had seen in this way for a long time, corrected from them a little bandage
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not believe that I was mistaken, but that in this case science and the doctor's art are of assistance in administering the cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	As for the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Like the way of seeing where the major opening is made:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the way of holding the limb in which the veins are ligated, to which two incisions are made at the ends of two toes
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	May the incision therefore be made as small as possible, and may be made with a needle or with the edge of a knife or with the tip of a pair of scissors.</start_of_turn>
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each incision should be as much as two fingers, and the margin of each should be as much as one finger, and the length of each should be one palm and a half; and between two veins there should be two adjustments of that middle vein which are already closed, of which the length should be half a palm and a little more, and the width of each should be as much as two fingers, or a little more.</start_of_turn
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional incisions are made at the mouth of the major opening so that it is opened with those two precautions which you have just mentioned.</start_of_turn>
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to the previous one, but more subtle and lighter.</start_of_turn
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made with a needle or with the edge of a knife or with the tip of a pair of scissors according to the shape of forceps.</start_of_turn
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of these there are two additional incisions like sometimes, and the length of these additional incisions is as much as a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.</start_of_turn
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the major opening, then do so by making the fifth [metatarsal] bone rest upon the bones of the foot, open what is between the thighs of the patient.</start_of_turn
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then place your hand over the instruments in the way that is done with forceps according to the quantity that you wish of the opening of the major opening so that the uterus makes room for it.</start_of_turn
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of making the incision which the ancient authors said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The way of making the incision which I mentioned before in which the foot is impaled.</start_of_turn>
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The way of making the incision which I mentioned before in which the great toe is contained.</start_of_turn
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps in which teeth are at the end, like sometimes, and several veins are like this made long like forceps in this way, like sometimes, to which teeth are like teeth of a saw in which the incision is made and contained.</start_of_turn
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The way of making a small incision.</start_of_turn
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The way of making an incision with a pointed spine.</start_of_turn
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The way of making an incision with two pointed spines.</start_of_turn
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The way of making an incision like forceps in which there is a closing clamp at the end of which the foot is contained.</start_of_turn
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The way of making an incision with two extremities at which the top is cut off.</start_of_turn
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The way of making two parallel incisions.</start_of_turn
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercises, and when there are many varieties of these and they are prepared, the doctor must know how to manage them, for the more curious one is the operation and the more skillful one is the man for the quantity.</start_of_turn
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with these instruments unless you are absolutely certain that you must, for the necessity of these is not excusable.</start_of_turn
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second toe.</start_of_turn
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second toe is retained you must support the ankle, and command the patient to flex the knee, and then stretch your hand over the mouth of the limb and over the nails of the limb, and if in doing so it is pushed out, do not be afraid.</start_of_turn
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If so, take an ointment and make a hole in the covering over the wound and place it on those herbs which open the mouth of the mother, thus with warmth and quickly and with alum, chamomile, saffron, arabic gum and mastic tree and rue.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the ointment, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And put a tube of canewhere in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside until the vapor comes out towards the cavity of the mother
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And do that again as we have said, and the second time throw it away with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if it remains close to this cure and is not expelled, when you command the midwife to immerse your left hand in olive oil or in milk of elder, and when you have introduced that into the wound and until it has become soft, when that has been found, take hold of it and gradually stretch it out, but if it is attached to the mother's belly, take hold of her hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, pull that out little by little as directed so that the mother does not suffer excessive pain.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	And be careful that it is exchanged from the right side to the left with ease
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And be adjusted in the amount of traction, so that it obeys and avoids adherence.<end_turn>
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed, as we have already recommended, the cure with turning and ointment of the ointment with herbs.<end_turn>
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled in all the ways we have recommended, know that you must not tire excessively at that attempt of extraction, however, cover that which comes out of her to the mouth of the mother lies in the cushion, and put a plaster on that which is left over; for that will prevent that from coming out again for several days and when it has dissolved and is expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it has become soft, it is of great bad odor to the head and the stomach, and that brings about the disease; and know that those things must be administered under fumes and with convenience to that which is appropriate for the disease.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	And indeed of the ancients, some already know the sub-fumigation of rue and dry figs.<end_turn>
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	A kind of instrument in which the woman is sub-fumigated must be due to the retention of menses and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Whether by seeing or by hearing.<end_turn>
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And be placed the inner limb in the wound and the outer limb over the fire, and the sub-fumigation be placed over the sleeves of the fire.<end_turn
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that inside until that sub-fumigation is consumed and do it again.<end_turn
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of the child's buttocks that are not perforated.<end_turn>
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The child cries and their buttocks are not perforated, which already happen secretly and softly.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then command the midwife to pierce as we have said that which already happens secretly; and if not, pierce that with a pointed cautery, and keep that it does not touch the skin.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and keep that inside until it is settled.<end_turn
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is softened, know that you must place in the hole for several days a tube to prevent the child from suffering.<end_turn
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And indeed sometimes the softening of the buttocks is caused by the consolidation of pus or of swelling; know that that consolidation must be softened, and that it must be cured with the things that we have said of the cure and of the plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the cure of fistulas that arise from behind.<end_turn
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that arise in the lower part of the buttocks are nodular and bulky, which arise from the buttock or in the space of the one part.<end_turn
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or boils.<end_turn
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodulus is old and corrupted by the white or soft humidity, and some herbs of these fistulas some penetrate.<end_turn
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known for that they come out with the evacuation and with the wind; and some women use the bad evacuation of the bowels, and as a result comes out from those things.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that which is known as fistula which penetrates into the belly and does not penetrate, is that you must tell him that it is at the end of the belly, and that you must try to remove it with a needle or with fire when it is crooked.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	May be if it is crooked, then you must enter into that attempt with a plum or the hair of a horse to sit on that needle or to hold it in the belly
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not succeed in that from the beginning, nor does any cause of egestion or vomit or wind come from this, as we have said, then it is not penetrating, and you must take care of it.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates the bladder or into the meat of the heel, the meaning of it is that there is urine from that and the prohibition of eating until the place is solidified by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	May be if it penetrates the joint or the bone and inflammation of pain in the circumference, the sign of it is that the needle has passed through here if it is not crooked through the bone, and inflammation of pain in the circumference of the part; and that from this it is reduced in every way; and that it has no value in this medicine, neither is it solidified at once.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure except work and the diligence of the doctors concerning which we must speak.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and is not old, recovery with fire is hoped for as you will order, and what I have already said and done
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient has opened between his thighs to the groin and has placed cushions under them, and has put his thighs against his belly, and has put his hand on the belly to prevent the intestines from coming out.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that is his case, you must tell him that it is at the end of the belly
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you sit on the belly the needle has already passed by itself to uncover, or another that you sit between the belly and that bladder or vein, then it is certainly penetrating; and do not work on that, for that is not in that healing, as we have said
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However I say that in some homes it is healthy in some people.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the medicine by which it is hoped to help in this case, it is that you make a pointed cautery subtle according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before, and you insert that ignition into the fistula until it reaches the belly; and then repeat that two or three times until you see that all those tissues adjusted to the fistula which seem like feathers of owls have been softened
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And take care of that which is wrapped in cloth around the border until all those tissues which have been adjusted are soft, and take care of that which is the medicine which engenders and consolidates the flesh, and if it is healed, it is well; but if not, it is not well in any other treatment
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the needle enters and does not penetrate into the belly which is at the end of the belly between that and the needle which is very close to flesh or vein, and sometimes the fistula in which it sees the surface of the heel, the sign is that it dries up the heel from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it dry up on the needle, and it is liberated from the fistula when the incision reaches the place where the extremity of the needle has gone, and for the needle is freed and catched
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And so soften those tissues which are put together like a feather pen of owls and do not remain from any cause
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	However if sometimes blood comes between you and your operation when you burn those tissues, it is better to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because the cautery with fire adjusts well many bad habits: so is the adjuction of those tissues which have been adjusted, and the excision of the blood excedent of the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And take care of that which is wrapped in cloth around the border or in causes distress until the part gets cold, and take care that the hour the plague is on the tough flesh is inflamed, engendered and consolidated
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And so medicines in which there is styptic and excision; when the hour is restored it is healed and you do not fear repetition
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	However if the fistula has already passed into the groin and is elongated from its surface of the body, then tell him that you must tell him about that
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	Therefore, if you sense the tentacles and between you and her there is either bile or blood, and it is likely due to penetration, do not perform an operation on her except according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of which is to administer in her three ways: either that you cauterize that area as we have said; or that you drain that which you consider to cause the curvature of her [foot] in order that it is possible for you to introduce the instruments and the cure itself; and do not proceed without causing damage to the wound containing the bone, and that you take care of the patient immediately regarding the exit of the disease; or that you strengthen that which we have said that is strong if she is sick; or that you stretch her out very much and tell her to pull out that pus which you drained from her foot, just as we have said, or with another sharp instrument, and that you modify those wounds that have burst open which are in the incision that you make; and that you endeavor to restore the whole of the wound that you opened, and if the pus is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the foot, and if there is still pus in the wound.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is ended in this way: when you insert the finger into the fistula, and it is at the back of the foot around the surface of the body and on the edge of the foot, then take hold of the finger and perforate the extremity, that is just as if you were preparing the flesh in this way.</end_of_turn>
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that firm covering of flesh or around those; and then insert the finger with force into the fistula until you have caused the curvature of her foot.</end_turn>
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Maybe if it has penetrated the edge of the foot properly, then extract the thread from that wound as soon as you have introduced it into the foot; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust the two extremities even, and bind each one, and keep her quiet for a day or two, and when it has subsided somewhat reintroduce the thread into the flesh; and when those flesh has been injured between the two extremities of the thread and has become soft, break it off.</end_turn>
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And take care of the wound until it is consolidated and healed.</end_turn>
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Maybe if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then do that which will penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, but do not do it carelessly, for that would be your fault if you were to cause her injury; and do that until it is healed.</end_turn
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The way of treating the spiny thorn of which the fistula is formed: the curvature of which is not acute and the other part is not blunt, so do not cause any damage that is not necessary, even as sometimes.</end_turn
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of wounds in which there is running suture in the incision of those.</end_turn
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Wounds are of two kinds, either those that remain between the thighs as if they were of cartilage, or those that are like grass seeds.</end_turn
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those there are small and large, and that run from these to these places and is one, and is not many, and is outside the thigh, and in the extremities of the thigh.</end_turn
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But indeed those that are outside the thigh are according to the measures of little humidity, of which run citrine water or a little of white ointment continuous, and according to the color of the flesh.</end_turn
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is inside the bone is that you order the patient to rest and express himself until the bone is healed and the wounds appear on you.</end_turn
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you will keep me shut and suspend the thread or that you have at your nail, and in this way you will prevent them from bleeding.</end_turn
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Maybe if you do not have nails in those for the humidity of them and their softening, then take the thread from those which you have at your nails and make it rough or thick or flabby of wool, and extract those from the wound, and then insert those again and sprinkle over them some fine powder near the incision, so that it adheres to them instead of cauterizing; or cauterize those as it is said in the chapter on cauterizing.</end_turn
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And take care of those as well as with the other treatment until they are healed.</end_turn
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the thigh does not obey discharge, then order the patient to cry out in the place where there is slight pain, and wash it with the water that is in the bone and let her discharge willingly when the patient groans.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	Maybe if the wounds are outside the thigh, the cause of them is light, and that you take hold of those with your nail, or that you take hold of those with a thread, and insert them, and take care of those with water as we have said until they are healed.</end_turn
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	He guessed the translation as follows:
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And thus do all these things, and leave one of them out and do not burn them, so that the excess of the sacred oil may flow from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place your hand over the groin immersed in rose oil or in beeswax; and place that over the heel and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that enter which case; and when it is closed, care for those at ease or another care within that it be healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the care of fistula.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Moist wounds arise from the excessive secretion of pus or from the constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are ancient and have no value in that medicine, when you see that they are moist and the pus that comes out is soft and hosts the scurf of pus that prevents them from solidifying; then care for them until they are solidified
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When you see them again in a more violent way than the first time when they are raw and are excoriated; then care for them until they are healed
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the care of wounds, this is key
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You must know that to apply pressure is key, and it is not if you do not notice redon according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it is useful in all parts of the body and especially in the lower parts of the feet and the buttocks, and because of these pains you must support them.</start_of_turn>
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cover that which is in the circuit of the key, and keep it with forceps or a clamp, and extirpate it from its root; and then care for that.</start_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is said beforehand in the head of the capital.</start_of_turn
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More of a verucca is a small rough fistula round about the surface of the body, and moist wounds are found in most of the children.</start_of_turn
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the care of them is to stretch and scratch that, or to stretch that with a faithful thread or with a needle inside the box.</start_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.</start_of_turn
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus they are eradicated both backwards and forwards with the instrument which I will tell you.</start_of_turn
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More of a wasp is a small fragrant or large fistula around about the surface of the body appearing like a bruise in it, and is useful around the body.</start_of_turn
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the care of them is that you take a needle of fine awl or of needle of turtle, and that it is strong, and place that on the wasp inside that it contains the circle of the needle of the parts of it; and then rotate your hand with the needle until you have instilled what is in the circuit of the wasp, and place that in the crease of the flesh and that you evacuate the wasp from its root.</start_of_turn
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do that with a needle of barley or iron according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part behind the needle will draw towards softness, deaf (that is not perforated), enclosed so that over the thumb the learning of the hand is ablated and the revolution of that.</start_of_turn
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the wasp as it is said above in the cauterization of the vein in the head of the cautery.</start_of_turn
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the way of the instruments that are administered to give comfort.</start_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some moist wounds are useful for the comfort of silver or lead or tin or malleable; and some moist wounds are useful for those instruments that are administered, for those that are administered in the care of young children should be small; and for those of which the buttocks are rough or painful, the comforts of those are small.</start_of_turn
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of great and little comfort.</start_of_turn
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle in which the bag is bound is wide according to this manner; and be distinguished by that where the bag is bound thus as often.</start_of_turn
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The limb affected with the pus is that which is included in the groin (so it is not opened like a lion), lagging behind slightly; and on one side of the limb there are two incisions, and on the other side one, and the size of the incision is according to the size of the rays, and the larger the better.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the dressing in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of goat's skin are placed, and the size of it should be like a palm
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with four incisions as if it were a wheel; and if the space between the incisions is the thickness of a finger
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert into those incisions faithfully strong thread, or around those; and adjust so that the dressing is firm; and when it is placed in them the dressing should be straight on the tip of the penis between two cushions, and press firmly on each incision: the better the quality of pressing on each is that you fill the dressing with medicine, which should be scaled according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and take care that it is not too cold or too hot
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient should be placed lying down on the two buttocks, and lift up their limbs above and rest them on something on which they already rest or a cushion; and anoint the affected limb with oil or with white of egg or with fennel mucilage or with alum; and insert that into the groin with ease, and the minister should support the dressing and express that out through two more times with great force until it is evacuated in the belly all that is in the penis; and then remove the penis and the patient takes back their limbs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to vomit, keep him under control as much as possible; and if he sleeps like that for the whole night, it is better to delay the treatment
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Better if you keep quiet about the belly troubles and the vomiting of the patient, the hour you will repeat the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the groin there are embolisms or blood clots, the hour the penis should be stiff like a lion, from the penises with which the children are accustomed.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Take care of the plague.<end_turn>
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the care of the plague that it was appropriate for the free man, and I say the same about the care of those with wounds and medicines according to the compliment
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to the cause of the plagues and according to the place where the plagues occur
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which many people suffer from plagues are various, such as from a bite of a dog, or an incision of a space or a nail, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or like those of many other causes
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Better the plagues that are in the places of the body are like the plague which falls on the head, or on the arm, or on the leg, or on the belly, or on the heel, or like those of the members
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the care of some plagues so that you stop that reasoning and rule about the others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will start with the simple head plagues, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when there is a simple head plague and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is from a bite of a dog or something similar, and if it has only drunk the codena and it is a great plague and you fear that there will be a fistula because of it, then you should immediately cover the head and perform a cephalic flebotomy as soon as possible; and extract according to what is necessary of the virtue of the medicine, as long as there is no other prohibiting cause of flebotomy, especially if the medicine that is to be extracted is that of the plague and is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the bleeding of the opposite side of the afflicted area; and keep the patient from eating and drinking and eating coarse food
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Better if from the beginning you prohibit any cause of vomiting, although it is not prohibited, reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And rest until the plague, if there is a fistula caused by the cautery, soak in oil of rue solet or in wine where it is stipped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Better if you are sure of the cautery fistula, the hour you rest until the plague, if it is recent at the buttocks and the air has not changed that dust which I recommend to remove little by little
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, the hour you rest until it is healed
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May be if the plague is great or if it is due to insufficient space and crowding, and the lips of the patient are not adjusted for vomiting, then adjust those at the sutures according to what I recommend for the sutures of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Maybe if the plague has already been expelled from the limb and is not retention but a slight swelling, then prick it and apply medicine to the wound and restore the limb in its place instead of excision, and command the patient to abstain from eating foods that are coarse: heads and brains and the like for them, until it is digested.</end_of_turn>
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find decay in the limb and it does not adhere to the bone, then prick all around the area and evacuate it, and then apply medicine to it.</end_turn
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Maybe if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood flows of a healthy nature, and it is not closed by medicine, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not closed, then prick it with the spatula or ligature; and if necessary you must cause that which we have said must not be done, then cauterize it until the blood is clotted.</end_turn>
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; thus sprinkle over them this powder, which when solidified will cause the air to dry them out.</end_turn
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil half a part, of blood one part, of vinegar two parts; let them all be ground together and sieved, and let the plague be filled with it, and let it be bound by good constriction until it adheres, and let it be coagulated with blood.</end_turn
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen it with those powders and read it, and do not remove it while it is still moist, for it is not eradicated by the medicine until it is healed.</end_turn>
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And every doctor does this alone, when it is not at your presence oil and blood.</end_turn>
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this same operation has already been done in great plagues when it was considered necessary to suspend it over those and make them wide, and only in recent plagues with their blood still fresh, which has not altered them.</end_turn>
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if they have been altered, especially when it is in summer, then it is not understood to the position of this powder, however, do apply over those with water that has been digested, or over those barley grains in water and honey until it has become reduced; and apply the other treatment along with this.</end_turn
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Maybe if an accident occurs in the plague fracture in bones, and it is small, then extract it with your hands.</end_turn
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the treatment of fractures of the head is that which is venomous.</end_turn
De las plaguas del col.	The provided text does not contain any information related to "plagues of the colon", so I am unable to translate or provide any context regarding this.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Maybe if the plague occurs in the colon, there is no difference in medication between it and the plague of the head when it is simple.</end_turn
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Maybe if the nerves of the colon are cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in their nature to take medication but to be treated with what makes violent stypticitation, thus as zinc and celery which is old and resembles them because it does not cause the nerves to swell and counteract that.</end_turn
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not remove any cause of all coolness, for the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of them is at the brain, which is the most important of all the members.</end_turn
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is necessary to cure it with medicines that are light, even as vinegar washed with lukewarm water, any vegetable smeared in olive oil or not, and throw it away when washed with lukewarm water and the other stones that are harmful must be removed according to this manner, and moisten.</end_turn
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	Maybe if the plague is great, then administer sutures, or bind the lips of the patient, and apply the powder until it is healed.</end_turn
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Maybe if the plague is deep or has occurred in the lower part, then pierce that in the most depressed place.</end_turn
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	Maybe if in the plague the artery is already cut and blood flow is achieved, then separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary, because you are causing it.</end_turn
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if the spondyles of the coccyx or all of them have already been cut, and the veins of the colon have been saved, then adjust the lips of the limb with sutures over the bone of the coccyx and do not touch that; leave that alone and reduce that to its natural figure, and strengthen that by stretching it down, and read that for several days; and apply that which causes stypticitation and excitement until it is healed.</end_turn
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already affected the bones, then pursue that [treatment], and if there are fragments of bone, extract them all; what is not injured, read it until the plague subsides, and whatever is not affected shall be separated and its evacuation alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the plague is recent, then sprinkle gunpowder over that area for which you have recommended it.</end_of_turn>
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If there is a fistula in the plague, then cure that from which the memory will come to you in the groin.</end_of_turn>
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the plagues of the belly or of similar [conditions] when there is pain between the shoulder blades, and if there is pain in the space or at the breastbone or at the flank or in the belly or of similar.</end_of_turn
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If percussion of the flank or the breastbone, and sometimes of the lung, and at times the depth [of the wound], consider more if the patient has excessive wind in the belly; for the plague is mortal.</end_of_turn
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth [to the wound] and the plague is recent at the surface of the skin, then for the first hour powder in it, and do not pull out that which would remain in the depth of the wound so that it returns to the heart and increases the patient’s pain, even though you pause in it immediately, remove those two veins from the patient for a while.</end_of_turn
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the tongue is not at your present, then pause in the orifice of the plague close to the heel so that it sucks up what is from the humors; and make the patient sleep over the plague so that it runs out what is in it adjusted.</end_of_turn
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If already of the plague three days have passed or more, and the patient has not had spasm or tremor of the body or severe abdominal pain or stricture of the belly, and sometimes other good signs of the patient, then know that the plague is saved; and then cure that with cold compresses and other treatments until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the patient is excused, and already a long time has passed, know that there is already a fistula; cure it therefore for the groin.</end_of_turn
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is from incision of the flank or the breastbone, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the thigh, then cure that with the liquid which precedes suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.</end_of_turn
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If already there has been great pain in the bones, and so already has it been pierced through, then turn the plague and cover to extract those pieces, if they are separated.</end_of_turn
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then read until the plague subsides, for its extraction is alleviated.</end_of_turn
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And as for other plagues that happen in other members, the help in treatment is the help of what has been said.</end_of_turn
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the belly plagues.</end_of_turn>
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that happens in the belly is either great, or little, or medium.</end_of_turn
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great quantity of veins in the belly are the gut or nerves of the gut, because it is a faulty intrusion of them and the suture of them must be more violent and more subtle.</end_of_turn
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a slight rupture is a difficult thing by another method, and if you do not guard against the intrusion of them into the cavity of the belly so that it is open and swollen because the membrane of them is faulty.</end_of_turn
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best rupture is medium, because in that one the reduction of the gut is not difficult, even though it is difficult in the two preceding species.</end_of_turn
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, more commonly in two sutures than in the sutures of the other plagues of the body.</end_of_turn
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are common in other plagues, more indeed only in the suture of the belly.</end_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you that you should expose and declare everything.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the plague is slight and there is any cause of the gut for that, and it is difficult to reduce that, then it is in two ways: either for the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the gut is caused by cold air inflammation.</end>
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Therefore when it is thus, you must cover that with your hand which you immerse a sponge of wool moistened in water on your head alone, or that you grasp in water squinant, and cypress, and pepper, and cloves until the inflammation is resolved.</end>
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Every vegetable food makes the urine dark, and it is better to drink only water in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Therefore, when the inflammation has subsided, then you should moisten the belly with water, in which it is contained, because by this means the intestines are relieved with little discomfort
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	More if the intestines are released in this way, then immediately bind up the disruption with a small instrument with which wounds are usually stitched.</start_of_turn>
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is better when it is gentle and not too dry, and does not unnecessarily consume food.</start_of_turn>
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	About the instrument, its shape is like this:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part is acute, and the other not acute, and the handle is slightly bent, but not to the point of being blunt, with the tip somewhat pointed.</start_of_turn
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore, when the disease is increased and the belly is protruded, then cover that its reduction should be in accordance with its natural form, in the place where it is, if possible above the wound, because that is better.</start_of_turn
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	More when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then cover that you place the patient on the two thighs and suspend their legs higher than the chest; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then suspend the head and the chest higher than the lower parts.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then keep your attention and your thought focused for a moment so that the part where the disease is should be higher than the other.</start_of_turn
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus cover that you administer water in the large and small boils.</start_of_turn
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small boils, suspend water until it is prepared, and make sure that it is administered between the most painful parts, which has the whole disruption in its hand and adjusts the lips of the wound, and immediately uncover from that to that which may cause the suture to break for any reason.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture technique: that you grasp the needle, or with a needle holder according to the amount of the wound's amplitude; and immediately after you grasp the extremity of the disruption from the little finger, and tighten the needle one, or more as you do not trust in the two extremities of the codena, from the two extremities of the nipple that is left from the codena of the parts downwards, until you have penetrated from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the codena and two extremities of the nipple, so that there are four orders in total.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And tighten firmly double in the circuit of the needle, and several vegetables from two parts together, and immediately add the two lips and the wound together; and immediately lay off the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that place, and immediately tie that one to this one as well as the first one; and do not stop until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.</start_of_turn
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And if the needles are small between coarseness and fineness, because the fine needles do not penetrate the flesh very willingly; and the coarse ones are difficult to introduce into the codena, therefore it is necessary that they should be moved in fineness and coarseness.</start_of_turn
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be fixed in two extremities of the codena too much, so that the flesh is not pierced too willingly and that the wound does not open before its consolidation.</start_of_turn
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the suture too much so that the wound is not hindered from consolidation.</start_of_turn>
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And immediately pierce the extremities of the needles so that they do not cause the patient to feel pain; and suspend the suture between expanded powder of every part, which has the extremities of the needles; and leave them in place until you believe that the wound is already consolidated.</start_of_turn
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These methods of suture with needles are more convenient in small boils, because they allow for the suturing of several needles or two together around them.</start_of_turn
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	More the second suture is common: and that is that you administer with the suture the four extremities, of the codena and two extremities of the nipple, at once, with a needle in which is faithful envolopat engual in fineness and coarseness.</start_of_turn
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And immediately when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle of that middle part from which you began, so that the thread retracts box from the soft part that rises up from the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture of silk which is the strongest.</start_of_turn
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the great toe.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture sews up the flesh.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And thus this suture sews up the wound which was caused by a person in the groin who was stung by a bee, and it was a disruption of the greater sciatic nerve from the bones around two palms of the foot, and it was the disruption of the median nerve; and thus I reduced that after the foot had been exposed to the wound for forty-two hours.</start_of_turn>
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and it was cured; and thus I left it to rest, and it was conserved in its places.</start_of_turn
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had said that it would not heal; and by a miracle, behold, I cured it without any other treatment, since in that place there was neither wound nor any medicine, but I simply kept the wound covered with two dressings a day and I washed it diligently with honey water until it healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I say two kinds of sutures are proper according to the narration of Paraula.</start_of_turn
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And thus you commence with a suture of the codena, and enter the needle from the outside to the inside.</start_of_turn
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates the codena and in that middle lacerate according to the rule and in length throughout the whole body, and leave the end of the thread where you have introduced the needle; and make penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the inside to the outside of the body.</start_of_turn
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus when you have finished making that penetrate, then make another penetrate in that middle part of the body from the outside to the inside; and leave the end of the thread that is in this place, and make penetrate the needle in the other extremity from the inside to the outside of the body.</start_of_turn
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And thus make penetrate in that way that the loop of your penetrate which is in the middle of the body which is in the part of the hand which is at the entrance of all those which penetrate.</start_of_turn
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And thus begin from this middle side and grasp that part of the thread which is in the middle of the body which is at the entrance of all those which penetrate, and extract the needle from the codena which has penetrated, and thus reduce that in that codena and close the part of the thread which is in the other side with this part of the hand; and extract that from the codena which is on the part of the hand.</start_of_turn
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And thus make a loop and another, and make a loop like this until you have closed all that which is outside according to that example.</start_of_turn
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with a suture of skin over which you sew the hair, in such a way that you sew the thread of the part of the extremity of the codena, and that you leave that other thread until it is finished.</start_of_turn
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of suture which I say is proper is that of Gualia, and this is to say as regards to her and for her it is recommended that you sew that according to the manner in which other physicians sew that, namely that you add all parts to their proper part to them conveniently; and apply the one end of them to the other end of them, and that is done as I have recommended to you.</start_of_turn
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Since you have left the needle in the part of the hand at your pleasure from the outside, make it penetrate from the outside to the inside of this sole, and leave two ends of the thread; and then reverse the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside of the two ends of the thread.</start_of_turn
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And thus reverse those loops, and make penetrate whatever is from the part of the thumb inwards into the part of the outside of the two parts of the hand in two other places.</start_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common lighter suture, and it is a suture of which there is precedent.</start_of_turn
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the manner of Gualia.</start_of_turn
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And thus I shall tell you, the belly suture is rectified with two needles, so that you enter into these with any thread, and begin with the introduction of the needle from that which is next to you, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those which sew the wounds together.</start_of_turn
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, the hour of the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.</start_of_turn
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The greatest judgment of the plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	When you notice the recent plague and its foul air, reduce the swelling and boils, and remove the dust and dirt from the wound appropriately, then stop over the fleshy powder
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then stop over the plague immediately, while it still makes the flesh hard and causes them to swell; consolidate them with fingers and look; then care for it as for the other plagues until it is healed
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines at hand, then stop over the plague as much as possible, for it begins to vomit blood, yellow bile and evacuates two stools a day, as you have seen and learned, until it is healed; for you should not take any other medicine in vain when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague communicates by wound to the principal members, then cover that you immerse linen soaked in olive oil of good quality, or in scented olive oil, and stop it in the area between the armpits and leave them covered.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If there is pain or putrefaction in the joints, which cause these veins to swell, then apply a black sticking plaster there, especially if the ulcer has penetrated the bone and is very painful.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	Know that the one that is of the great bone is of lighter pus than that which is in the small bones.</start_of_turn>
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the bone called "gegunu" does not recover from the plague that enters it whole; for there are many veins in it and it is large, and because of the body of the bone and its proximity to nerves.</start_of_turn>
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you have just seen the recent one, reduce it according to your custom for swelling of the joints.</start_of_turn
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed to the space and is already green or black, then strengthen it firmly over the area that is defiled by it, so that there flows out of it a flux of health, for there are veins and arteries in the fabric.</start_of_turn
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And so do the incisions that are another of those ligaments, and suspend two extremities of the thread pending the part where the plague has passed through, for over you there will be relief of the attraction of it from the tissue and emission of the blood of the plague.</start_of_turn
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the plagues when they happen in the bone.</start_of_turn>
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is disruption in the bone and it is slight, it is possible that it will be cured in the flesh, in order to prevent the one which was placed inside from remaining there because of the expansion of the belly and the fistula, and because of the vomiting and diarrhea.</start_of_turn
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then we will follow the treatment of it even though we did not have confidence in the healing of it, but we will continue to subtilize it until it is healed and the area is consolidated.</start_of_turn
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And we must say that the area is already consolidated, time to go over the illness that happened in the belly; and do not take anything for that bad accident except for food and drink, and to rest in bed and be exercised in these things.</start_of_turn
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And we have already said that some experienced people say that when the plague is in the bone and is slight, it should be bound in this way: take large caps; and put two fingers of the plague between the toes and hold one finger of the plague over the two fingers of the plague; thus, when you press on those and open your mouth, the head will break off and adhere and will not be dissolved.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And so do another finger for the first one, and do not cease until you have made as many fingers as there are in the whole plague.</start_of_turn
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce that and cover the plague; and leave those heads attached to the bone until the bone is healed; and do not cause any damage to the illness.</start_of_turn
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the bone is bound with the thread that is natural to the beast's bone, because it is finer; take the extremity of these bones and do not cut it off, and bind the extremity to the thread with a knot, encase it, and put that thread through needles and sew it into the bone, and reduce that which is in the disruption.</start_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this way of stitching with fingers is nothing but by faith and hope.</start_of_turn
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the small joints, then the cause is not violent but subtle, and it is not the healing of them all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	From the care of worms and fistula.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every plague and swelling, when it grows old and becomes antique, is an ulcer, and is not solidified, and lasts always and is not separated, that in whatever part it is, is universally called fistula and we call that one worms.</end_of_turn>
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula truly is a foul, hard, white nodule to which there is no pain and which has a cavity just as a wound of an ulcer; and for this reason it is called a wound risk, that is, a wound.</end_of_turn
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in a wound of wet humors, which lasts a long time; and when the wetness is dried up, it is separated in a few hours.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And every vegetable of this moisture is mobile, and is little, and is great, and is subtle.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And indeed I have already said in the division that whenever a wound is not healthy or not in it pure flesh, it is not because of anything else except for one of these causes: either for scarcity of remedy in the body; or for malice; or because there is hard bone between it and the lips that hinders the birth of flesh; or because of bad laws; or because that ulcer in itself brings pus and the matter that is carried to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in the treatment of it; or when corruption exists in the area, and it is pestilence; or because of the properties of the area like in Saragossa, in which it is difficult to digest ailments, and it is delayed in the healing of swelling by nature; or because there is bone in it, or multiple bones.</end_of_turn>
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have already been shown, and the treatment of them with medicines has been explained in the division.</end_of_turn
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so I tell you the treatment of fistula which is useful by means of an operation with the hand.</end_of_turn
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You know that fistula can happen in all parts of the body; that some of these fistulas go through great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or the belly, or the bladder, or the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the spine, or any of the compound joints like the hand and foot; and of these that give proximity to the main limb and resemblance.</end_of_turn
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, of these fistulas which are treated in this way, those that are according to this manner are among the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and require work and ignorance.</end_of_turn
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is of any fistula whose depth you do not perceive to reach these places that I have said, and you hope and trust in the treatment of it, and you wish to achieve cognition of it, then you take hold or grasp with your hand, and if the fistula follows the rule, and inquire about it.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is crooked, then investigate that which is in the palm of the hand, for the palm with the elevation of the body is alleviated and curved over the crookedness.</end_of_turn
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is full of horrible bones, it is not possible for you to understand it by your attempt.</end_of_turn
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore glorify the Lord for his works, for the humidity for which you glorify him goes away from the other works and comes from them.</end_of_turn
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire carefully according to what manner is possible for you to know if here are bones or nerves, and is the curvature of the fistula long or short, or is it a fistula to which there are multiple bones and this is above all that you have of strength, of your inquiry, of the things that you inquire about, and the invention of the pain due to your compression with your hand over the area, and resemblance to the signs and the causes of the swelling.</end_of_turn
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all these causes at rest, then go to the treatment with confidence: and that is that you consider whether the fistula is apparent close to the skin, long in the joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or veins, or in any of the places that I have told you.</end_of_turn
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then dry the fistula as it is said in the narration, and remain there until what is in that filtration and putrefied flesh is gone, and what is born in the wound of the flesh, or of the blood vessels, or of resemblance, and cure that which enters until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth, and is according to the rule, then cover that with your thumb as much as possible, and at the same time soften all your corrupted flesh; and give lukewarm compresses with acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood with the hand.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And thus we shall say that whatever is seen within which the acute medicine has eaten away all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore that which was burned with carbolic substances which produce healthy flesh until it is healed
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	More likely if it is not healed by this, then cauterize that as we have recommended
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	More likely if the cause of the fistula is bone, then you must confirm that, and dry that as we have recommended, if you do not prevent any cause of vein or nerve or major limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	More likely if it is found in the bone and there is some corruption and blackness, then you must burn that out until the corruption is completely gone; and then care for that which is burned out until it is healed
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and emits black pus as before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and now uncover it further and inquire into the cause of it and the alteration of that which is burned out with the utmost care, and restore that.</start_of_turn>
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And thus if it is healed, well and good; but if not, know that that corruption is in the profound depth of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore lay open that which is not useful but only harmful.</start_of_turn>
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corruption of the bone is small, or you are able to draw that out, then draw it out with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.</start_of_turn
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if so many bones are moved, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any cause of weakness in your strength.</start_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	More likely if there is any cause of moisture there, and at the beginning there is no fear or mistake, then pierce those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.</start_of_turn
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	More likely if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then stop over the wound that has been made to allow the wound to heal, and leave that until the bones of flesh and ligaments are expelled, and keep the wound from solidifying, and keep the incision which you have made in your operation restricted.</start_of_turn
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Indeed, if you are afraid, stop over the limb immersed in tepid oil, or the limb immersed in Egyptian unguent, or in something of the like, so that when the ligaments are softened, and the bones are separated from their embrace, the traction is alleviated.</start_of_turn
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	More likely if it is a large bone such as the femur or tibia or the like, and what is corrupted is only the surface of it, then burn that out only as much as is necessary until that blackness and corruption has disappeared, and then restore the wound.</start_of_turn
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	More likely if what is corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and all that has been incised so that the corruption is not extended, and care for that until it is solidified.</start_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you ask a man in his bed to help you with this example and assistant in your operation.</start_of_turn
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	For a young man in his prime around xxx years of age, who has experienced pain in his heel, and from whose limbs maudlin blood flows profusely over the substance of the limb within which the substance is spread to the heel, and is a matter of great swelling, and not of an extrinsic cause.</start_of_turn
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And thus it is necessary to extend the time for the error of the doctors until the swelling has subsided, and to reduce the matter of bone fragments, and their care should be paused until the wound has healed, and they should make incisions in all the painful places from which all the pains and humors of the body have disappeared.</start_of_turn
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And thus many doctors have cured this in two years, and I have not heard of this until now.</start_of_turn
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the wound of the limb and the matters that ran from it out of great pain; and already the color of that man was very pale and yellow.</start_of_turn
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And thus I introduced my hand into one of those wounds and found the bone there.</start_of_turn
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And thus I saw that they had all disappeared from all parts of the wound.</start_of_turn
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And thus I shut myself in and made an incision in one of those wounds through which I extracted a piece of the bone, and I cauterized that corruption, and it was already black and corrupt and putrid; and part of the limb was already corrupted before I had penetrated it.</start_of_turn
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And thus I followed what was prescribed and prepared by the master himself.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I observed that it was not in the bone but that corruption which produced the swelling and pain, and I had already evacuated it.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I applied the restoration of the wound with supportive medicines for a long time, and it is not consolidated.</end_of_turn>
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And thus I repeated the procedure and discovered further on the bone according to the first discovery, and there remained persistent corruption of the bone.</end_of_turn
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I observed that from that corruption there appeared to me a perforation to be made for the cure and restoration, and it is not restored.</end_of_turn>
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And thus I discovered another ulcer which did not cease to bleed small fragments of bone until I perforated the restoration of the limb, and it was not restored until I extracted the marrow with my thumb, and I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated and healed.</end_of_turn>
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of the limb and its section, but for the evacuation of the pus and for the rarity of the limb's tolerance and its fear of death, which it suffers at all hours from excessive evacuation without any benefit.</end_of_turn>
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore health is for the whole cure, and nothing is more useful than the evacuation of the pus in the belly; and it is good to restore the virtue of the limb; and it is conserved in its evacuations and does not cause it to become lame or painful in any way.</end_of_turn
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	More if the limb is prominent in the body already, the hour covers that you should do this in the following manner: that you take ligament and stretch that at the extremity of that prominent limb, and command that someone extend that in its entirety; and pull that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then lay that over the bone that you leave behind the limb, and stretch the limb so that you drive the bone to the parts behind, and you uncover the bone over the place you wish to close, so that the marrow does not become bruised.</end_of_turn
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And leave fasting or a table behind so that the limb is properly descended, for when you do this the marrow is not prohibited from being squeezed out of the corrupted bone.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover that the scraping of the diseased area is small by small, for if it is in the cavity of the bone corruption does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, and forces the closure of the other ulcer.</end_of_turn
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the limb is corrupted and not prominent, the part that remains is continued with the other, and the corruption is at the middle or in part of it, the hour you uncover the bone throughout; and then leave fasting, and command that you stretch that which was the first part from which corruption arose until the closure of the other part is completed.</end_of_turn
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the scraping be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.</end_of_turn
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incisions that joint that is corrupted, and scrape the bone where the other part is continued.</end_of_turn
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, the hour is not in proportion but ingenious.</end_of_turn
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is not easy; however, cover that you inquire about the corruption in what way it appears to you, and open that, and tell me what way you wish to handle it, and in what way you wish to correct it, when it does not make you contradict blood or nerves.</end_of_turn
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what is incisions and what instruments to use for incisions of these bones are not always according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and the size of them, and their smoothness and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; for you must prepare for every kind of operation the appropriate instruments for that operation.</end_of_turn
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation means for you about the kind of instrument from which you will be guided; when in your case it is great study and long and with knowledge of the methods of this art, and testimony of the methods of treating diseases, for you already have them at your disposal for your medicine.</end_of_turn
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will find among the simples with which you will perform your order that you will experience about the others.</end_of_turn
Forma de serra:	The provided text does not contain any information regarding the specific tools mentioned in the document, so I am unable to extract the requested data from the given context.
Forma de autra serra:	The provided text does not contain any additional information regarding other tools, so I am unable to extract the requested data from the given context.</end_of_turn>
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another remedy:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another remedy: Great remedy.
Forma de ray:	The next sentence is: "When the disease has been banished by this remedy, a plaster should be applied to the limb."
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The plaster should be made in the shape of a star with a claw, and the points should be like those of a staple
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not apply it until the joints are confirmed to be broken, or the mouth is greatly expanded
Forma de razori major dels autres:	This remedy is more potent than the others.
Forma de razori menor:	This remedy is less potent than the others
Forma de razori lat:	This remedy is lateral
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	When the remedy has been appropriately applied: make an arch with the thumb and index finger, and reduce the acute pain, and gently stretch the limb downwards
Forma de lu:	Like this
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Like the one that has been concaved
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Like another subtle remedy
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Like another remedy of curved extremity
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Like a small tentacle-like remedy
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Like a knife with which the bones are inccised
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Like another minor incision
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Like another incision; this one is similar to a ray, and the limb is held in a claw-like position, and is shown in many locations in proportion to the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Like a ray that is perforated through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the limb is triangular and acute-angled
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and like all the causes that we have mentioned of raspings, incisions and knives.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incisions of the extremities and the closing of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are sometimes affected by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption for the healing of those medicines and the healing does not relieve it, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the limb without you having treated it, when in that case you must instill that limb within the hon that accompanies the corruption, so that the illness is banished by that of death or by evil that is more harmful to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign that this will happen is that the limb becomes black before it is healed, or that it grows pale towards black before the black has disappeared from that part of the limb that was affected by the corruption; therefore do not inscribe that limb in that case
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a venomous bruise, such as from a scorpion, a fox or a spider, or something of that kind
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or the bruise is in the tip of the finger, then you must inscribe the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to enter the hand
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if you reach the hand, then you must inscribe that of the root of the nail, and do not leave space for the corruption to enter until it has disappeared from the nail of the arm
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you do not do that, then inscribe the arm inside the fold at the joint
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if this should happen again, and sometimes the fold goes away, then in that case the illness is death; and to administer another cause along with this one is an excessive amount of virtue
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, if the corruption affects the toe when it goes away from the finger, then you must inscribe that within one of the nails
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it comes to the heel of the foot, then you must inscribe the whole foot
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Even if it goes into the nail, then you must inscribe the limb at the joint of the nail
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the nail, then do not attempt anything but dismissal, and let the illness take its course
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the limb or cutting it is that you grasp the ligament in the part beyond which you wish to inscribe, and grasp another ligament over the area; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts beyond, and extend the minister another ligament in their; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments without splitting them too much, until all the flesh has been discovered; and then inscribe or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover that the patient's limbs are completely still so that they do not move the area, and that the patient receives the wound adjusted and then remove the cautery.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If blood flows forth carelessly during the work, then immediately cease the cautery at the site, or hold back the veins somewhat to constrict the blood; and then return to your remedy until completion.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And immediately bind the affected limb with a bandage or as convenient, and care for him until he is healed
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I advise you that you should send a man to the foot of the patient, who is the cause of this unfortunate accident that I have mentioned and which you have recommended, for in the foot of the patient is an inflammation similar to the burning of fire.</end_of_turn>
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That inflammation first occurs in the said foot until it affects the whole limb.</end_of_turn>
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man should prepare himself with more care than before, when he shall go to the limb with great pain and great swelling, and the patient must be given rest until the swelling subsides and the pain ceases.</end_of_turn>
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time that painful inflammation remains in the toes.</end_of_turn>
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And thus I say, and so I must report that that uselessness that is on the hand of the physicians must be removed, so that the body of the patient is restored; and it does not remain useless but begins to depart from the hand as soon as it begins on the hand.</end_of_turn
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And I ask you to order the hand to be cauterized, and I do not wish to do anything more in hope of the result of that uselessness, for I fear that it may bring about the death of the patient, since the power of the disease lies in its violent nature.</end_of_turn>
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he awakens, let him return to his home and let me know that that man has prepared himself and cauterized his hand, and that he is healed.</end_of_turn
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not recounted this tale for any other purpose than to be of service concerning this disease, and for the significance which it has and which is to be observed in its operation.</end_of_turn
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Beware of physicians who lack skill and whose quality of care is lacking.</end_of_turn>
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess bursts in a fleshy limb, the space of the abscess is prolonged until the collection of pus has finished, and then it is broken and pierced, and the pus is discharged from it. The limb remains as if it were a vessel, and the surrounding tissue, which has been loosened by the abscess, is like a subtle thread, and it is not to be mistaken for a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption becomes established in some part of the limb, then it is called a fistula and not a simple abscess.</end_of_turn>
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for such a fistula is that you should stretch out that surrounding tissue completely as if it were a wheel, and more so when it is thin and flexible, and comfort yourself that it does not adhere to the place of its corruption.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the surrounding tissue will adhere and that the corruption will not have further consequences, and if blood has clotted in the tissue, then you must care for that.</end_of_turn
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you must consider the safety of the patient, and if it is great, and if the limb that you see has a foul odor, then you must administer that Egyptian medicine which is made of olive oil, vinegar and lead, and which is given in doses equal to the parts of barley, and they are covered over the fire until the medicine is done and has reached its proper consistency.</end_of_turn>
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and cauterize that area, strengthen the edges of the wound, and leave the medicine on it for the space of two hours.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And extract from it what is superfluous; and do this for many days until the limb is healed and the pain is gone.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some physicians cauterize with water of ashes, when it is not at your disposal this medicine; and you take the ash of vinegar, and put it on the wound; and thus you will know when the limb is finally healed.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then you must cauterize with water and honey and mix in some zinc oxide, and also mix in some vinegar and honey, because honey has the property of softening and washing away, and vinegar has the property of adhering the limb, especially when there is excess of stickiness and dryness.</end_of_turn
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you see some redness and swelling, and that the pain has already subsided, then clusterize that area which is causing the swelling.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Take some unguent diaphtharic and dissolve that oily pus; or clusterize that area with some medicinal unguents, and apply others which have the properties that I have already written about in the treatise on unguents.</end_of_turn>
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the orifice of the vein is strict in which the catheter is not received, then enlarge that area little by little, and stop when it is enveloped in Egyptian or basilic ointment.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the orifice is wide, then tighten the edges of the vein with sutures and leave as much space as is necessary for the catheter to pass through.</end_of_turn>
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifice from which the blood flows upwards is elevated to the surrounding parts, then dry that area under the limb which is above that in order that the limb may flow downwards, because when the limb is constricted in the curvature of the vein, the blood will be forced out of it.</end_of_turn
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible for you to dry out the limb within the surrounding parts as you wish, then you must perforate that area and prepare the limb with the preparation which is commonly used for it, and do not hold it back by any cause of the limb.</end_of_turn>
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines which are to be applied to the convenient part of the vein until you have extended them over the root of the limb.</end_of_turn>
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And take the margin of the limb of such a quantity as to enable the communication of all the veins; and at the end of the vein insert a cautery a a distance a little greater than the orifice of the vein; and extend over another part of the limb the ointments which you have taken, according to the quantity of the wound, and place them over that part for a long position of the vein so that the pain of the limb is relieved and is not felt at the orifice of the vein.</end_of_turn>
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May he who is over the orifice of the vein which you have left behind, remain there for an hour so that it may heal from the pressure of the limb.</end_of_turn
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And that you may know whether the blood from the limb is moving or is sluggish, or is digested or undigested.</end_of_turn
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And take into consideration the place of that vein, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is swollen.</end_of_turn
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter which is clotted over the orifice of the vein has already adhered, or is improperly adherent, then you must remove it or do so three days later, and when you remove the scab, change the bandage for another and renew the ointment.</end_of_turn
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May there be no harmful viruses near the vein, for the healing of the limb is proper, for in some homes there is a slow generation of pus in the wounds, and in others it is beneficial to oppose it.</end_of_turn
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the limb has remained swollen for a few days, the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein is delayed and is the cause of the prolongation, then you must adjust with an excision of the medicine, and if the medicines are too moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are too dry as well as when they are applied too thickly.</end_of_turn
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And it is better that after this the pain has ceased, that you take diaphtharic unguent and dissolve it in oily pus, and apply some ointment of vinegar to it in its substance, and so comfort that area, and use it.</end_of_turn
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And thus it is seen in that action, when the limb is not present, that diaphtharic unguent, better when it is cold, should be taken until it is engrosed; or that you take mirra and aloes and incense, grind them all and powder them over the honey when it is lukewarm, and pour it over the wound and strengthen that over the vein; and pour over the honey that which has been ground until it is engrosed, and powder it over the wound and strengthen that.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And various other medicines are administered with it, according to the long tradition and the wisdom of celestial lilies (which are celestial lilies), and barley flour and cocksfoot and centaury, and use either of these simples or adjust them, grind them and powder them over the honey which I have recommended; and use them.</end_of_turn
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the limb is prolonged, and is not healed by this treatment, it is understood that the corruption is in the root of the limb, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other members distant or to the ligaments; then you must treat with fistula treatment, as it is said above.</end_of_turn
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	From care of swelling and nails attracted, and incision of the finger added, and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Pannaris is swelling which does not leave the nail of the finger protruding from the hand or foot, and which is strong in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged its care is more expensive, or is spontaneous swelling, or is corrupted, and it emits a stench until it corrodes the root of the nail, and is strongly corrupted throughout, and is strongly prone to corruption at the bone within which it is located, and has a fetid odor.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you see that which we have said in the division and you do not confirm your care, the hour covers that you completely cauterize all the superfluousness that is softened by the nail and immediately cauterize the plaque immediately because the cautery is not useful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If indeed the bone is soft and the nail is sound, and the affections of the nail are already departing from the cartilages, and are beginning to puncture and bruise them, the hour covers that you leave aside the angle of the nail which is biting the flesh, and push back the same with your hand and cut that flesh with ease, and leave over only what remains of the flesh from the medicines that burn away the corrosive parts until it is all gone; and immediately care for that which remains inside that it should be sound.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already spread in the bone, the hour covers that you extract the bone and remove it, for no time is it sound for the bone to be corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corruption and the corruption go down to the finger, the hour covers that you make an incision in one of the nails as it is foreseen in the reminder, and immediately care for that which remains inside that it should be sound.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail has percussion or swelling, and there is acute pain, the hour covers that you immediately apply cold compresses to the patient, and immediately dry the nail with rough sponges or transverse cuts without causing damage to the nail, and keep it that the cut does not reach the flesh that is left under the nail, because you will make the acute pain worse, and the cause of the adjusted surplus of flesh in the area. And immediately care for that area where the pain persists.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	The adjusted surplus, which is natural in most households, is strong in meat, and is strong in bones, or is strong in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	The cause of these is the root of the joint, or is the cause of these in the bones of the fingers
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one which is caused in the bones of the fingers does not worsen, but the one which is caused in the joints is more harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those which are caused by meat, the cut is slight, and is that you make an incision at the root with the tip of the scissors
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And of those which are caused by the root of the joint, the care is difficult; and therefore take care of the amputation of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in those where you must cut the nails, cover that you make the incision at the beginning of the flesh surrounding the bone to the bone, and immediately grasp with one of those convenient saws, and immediately care for that which remains inside that it should be sound
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which happens in these fingers between their soft tissues or by the birth of the fetus that does not depart, or by consolidation of pus or by burning of fire, or by habit, in which case you must cover that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And immediately stop between their cloths covered in oil so that they do not adhere too firmly, and separate between them, or place between them a layer of lead foil until it is consolidated as much as necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And in the same way if consolidation happens in the bones of the palm, the hour covers that you dry that consolidation according to the custom and convene it to the shape of the limb
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the cutting of vices, so are varices.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varices, and these are veins which are covered with thick veins full of black bile which are found in the bones of the body, and their greatest movement is in the limbs, and most of all in the limbs of travelers and laborers and porters.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore you must administer purgatives of the body of black bile several times with forceful expulsion, and immediately bleed the patient from the basilica vein
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	And the care of them is in two ways: one is that it is incision and that you cauterize that black stain, and the other way is that you elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is done in this way: with the thumb of the hand supporting the limb at the beginning, so that the thick black stain is dissolved, which is fruitful of the limb, and then tighten the limb of the patient to the upper part of the cushion with a bandage, and immediately dry the vein in one place, or in two, or in three at a wide incision, and immediately elevate the black stain to the navel with the thumb of the other hand, and pull it out, until the amount that you want has been extracted, and that which will tolerate the virtue of the disease.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And so say that, and command them to abstain from foods that cause black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment for phlegmometry when the veins are swollen and the patient complains of pain.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the limb should be done as follows: you stretch the limb of the patient, if there is movement in it, and then put it in water and bandage the limb with warm water until it turns red and the veins become engorged; or that it be performed by exercise, if the water is not at your disposal, until the limb is scorched.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And so cut the vein at the root or at its neck, or at its lower part you must give it support, or in the lowest part you must do the same.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And so open the vein with scissors and scrape the vein throughout until bleeding appears, and it is necessary to see that the bleeding stops when the pain disappears.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so avoid the white that remains of the vein thus.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then put your hand over the bleeding so that it is elevated and bound up from the vein, and suspend that until the bleeding stops.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And so cut another section near that section for three fingers, and so scrape the vein from the part below the vein until bleeding appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And so elevate that and pierce that in the lower section you must give it support, and so extract that and elevate that until it is healed by the second section, and so extract that from the section above that
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that until you have extracted that from the section that is lowest or highest of all the sections, until all is healed; and then pierce that again
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey my order to extract and elevate, then put in a strong double needle and ligate that and extract it, or put your hand over the bleeding and rotate your hand over the whole area until it is bound up
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Beware that it is not pierced; for if it is fractured, it is difficult to elevate that limb and it is harmful to the patient for that night.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When all the bleeding has ceased, then pause over the place of the wound and soak in wine and olive oil and unrefined olive oil, and care for that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is contracted having spasms at the parts where it is bound, and it is not according to the rules as we have said, then you must cover that you have opened over the whole extent of the spasms of the limb and the parts where it is bound, and then suspend that until that whole thing is elevated
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Beware that you must not pierce the vein and do not touch that, for it is difficult to elevate that limb; and use your prudence in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The text provided does not contain any information regarding the formation of an incident involving a dry vein, so I am unable to provide a translation for this section.
Forma de unci orp:	The provided text does not contain any information regarding the method of tying off an artery, so I am unable to provide a translation for this section
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not urgent like that with scissors or of immediate extremity for that it does not harm the vein; and it has great flexibility like a lion, for if it were slight, it would fracture the vein by its slightness; having great thickness in it as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the thigh vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein originates in the buttocks as well as in the Arabian lands and in the dry lands of India where there is little vegetation and little rain.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also engendered in other parts of the body besides the buttocks.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	Its origin is from corruption that comes from leaving the vein as well as from bites of serpents and worms and bites of lice and worms that are engendered between the vein and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the coming of this disease is when the vein is inflamed in the limb; and in that place swelling appears; and from the place of that swelling the vein begins to dry up like that which appears to be caused by the root of a plant
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And thus when the limb appears, cover that part with a plum whose weight is equal to two drachmas. Enter two drachmas, and notice that and leave the plum suspended from the limb.</end_of_turn>
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times as there are causes for those things outside, cover that with a cushion and do not touch that
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is not prolonged, then you will insert a portion of it [the diseased part] and cover it; do not insert that which is contracted within, for if you insert that which is contracted and enters the bone, it will cause swelling and ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it must be treated gently and gradually extracted, until it is completely expelled from behind and does not leave any residue in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein is extracted in its entirety as many as there are fingers of one hand, and it has already reached me that there has been extracted one of twenty palms.</end_of_turn>
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of its treatment, then immediately put a ray into the cavity of the limb and perforate that which is long along the limb of the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and give putrefaction of the limb for several days with medicines; and take care of that for the healing of the abscess.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has various veins, and more so when it appears at the ankle or on the foot, and it comes out of almost every orifice of the limb.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore take care of that as we have said in the division and as regards what has been said above.</end_of_turn>
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section above comes the worms generated under the skin and is called bovine fever.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in every land bovine fever because it comes out in the veins of the beasts and is very dangerous, for it goes throughout the whole body, damaging and weakening everything, and is shown by the suffering of the patient from pain in each limb until the bone is fractured and comes out.</end_of_turn
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of various humors as well as the worms and snakes and worms and lice in the belly.</end_of_turn
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, for when it enters the body and is elevated to the head, it reaches the brain, and when it enters, it breaks and destroys the brain, and that is what causes the veins to swell.</end_of_turn
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, you must not do so without seeing its walking and apparent movement, and when you see it, cover what is above it and what is left of it with a bandage, and tighten it firmly, and then dry it and extract it.</end_of_turn
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is pressing on the bone and you do not remove it, immediately put a cautery over the area until it remains there, and the greatest cause of fear is the corruption of it as we have said.</end_of_turn
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May it sometimes happen that the ailment has reached the head near the brain, then tighten over the brow with great stricture, and dry it over it, and extract it; and let the patient use a purgative medicine to evacuate foul humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.</end_of_turn
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the section above comes the swelling of the abscess.</end_of_turn
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land nafir, and it is the pain which is seen in all the limbs, and it is usually confused from limb to limb.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that which I will tell you to recommend.</end>
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I saw her arm swollen, and I saw a small swelling in the funis vein of the arm, and when I left for an hour, I saw that swelling had gone away just as quickly as it had appeared, as if it had never been there.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I went away from the pain of that place and remained in the muscle, and I stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I went to the other limb until I reached the other arm.</end_of_turn
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to her that she should rotate her body throughout the whole limb as I saw; and I was too amazed at the transformation and the speed of limb to limb.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen it before in my days in that way, but I have seen many others who suffer from pain that is transformed from limb to limb.</end_of_turn
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen anything like that in the girls.</end_of_turn>
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that it is anything but that the woman was of great age, and she had many old bones and veins exposed, and in this appearance there was a sensation of that rapid transformation.</end_of_turn
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that it does not appear according to this retrograde procedure in those who are delicate and have humors of veins that are thickened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	As you wish concerning the treatment of these people who have that pain, and when the patient sits there with that pain, do not be afraid to touch them as we have said, but rather strengthen yourself over that area and leave them calmed down until that congestion has gone away, and then cauterize the area.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Perhaps if you do not see the thighs swollen, when you treat that which is the excess of the body and what expels the congestion, sing them with those who are pallid and those who are pale, and let them appear like little pills of bile and little pills of saffron.</end_of_turn
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to their species and according to the places of the body in which they are cast, because their diversity is that of those that have large heads and small, concave, and blunt, so that they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have bars.</end_of_turn>
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the limbs and the parts in which they are cast is according to two methods: that the limbs or the principal limbs with cause, such as the brain, the heart, the spleen, the lung, the ribs, the belly, the bladder, and the testicles, and therefore when you cast in some of these limbs and you see at your throat death, which cause I recommend to you nearby, when that does not appear to you in these major disposisions, and the arrow is not obscured in the depth of the limb, then you extract that one and care for the wound.</end_of_turn
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And concerning the throats of the servants is when they cast in the arrow and it passes through them, and is situated over the brain which is about the size of an egg, because of which accidents happen to them of vomiting violently, and sneezing, and dizziness, and hiccups in the belly, and inflammation and hiccup of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of sense and vomiting of bile, and great heat is produced by the breaking of the word and the destruction of the voice, and it is situated in the place of the wound a white moisture resembling clots, and it looks like the consistency of blood.</end_of_turn
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see this throat, the hour you abstain from the treatment and from the extraction of the arrow, if not outside.</end_of_turn>
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	More are the throats of the arrow when it is cast in the heart, so that it is at the left breast, and sits on that which is the cause of hardness, and is not a cause of voidance; and when the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the guts, and runs from the wound black soot, and if anyone has suffered from the coldness of the extremities, and excessive sweating, and fainting; and therefore you must know that death descends immediately.</end_of_turn
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the throats when the arrow has lodged in the lung are thus: they are immediately filled with black spots of the plague, and the veins that are next to the gut are burst, and the color of the sickness is changed, and great spirit is exhaled, and demands fresh air.</end_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow is cast in the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is thus: it is proper of the small bones, and it is useful to remove it with great vomiting and great pain, and do not move all the muscles of the limbs.</end_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow is cast in the stomach, the hour great heat comes from the plague running through it.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is cast in the belly, and is lodged there, comes great wound of the plague, or the membrane, or the intestine which is burst, and there is no hope of the treatment of its extraction.</end_of_turn>
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow is cast in the bladder, and comes out with urine, and proceeds from it any cause to the outside, and there is great pain over the sickness, the hour you must know that it is fatal.</end_of_turn
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And as for the rest of the limbs, thus also the face, the head, the throat, the liver, the spleen, the kidneys, the ribs, the collarbone, the shoulder blades, and the arms and their limbs, are saved according to the greatest provisions when the arrow does not find a vein or an artery and is not a venomous arrow.</end_of_turn
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you what I have seen of the being of these arrows, for that it signifies concerning the treatment of your illness.</end_of_turn>
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man who was shot with an arrow in the tear of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted that from the other side, left him with the gray of the eyebrow, and he is healed, and did not suffer in his eye afterwards.</end_of_turn
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a soldier who had been struck in the groin area, leaving the wound open, and the arrow was already hidden so that it was not possible to retrieve it except for a small fragment that adhered to the thigh, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with gold in the head.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And thus is the soldier, and not at all injured in the groin area
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who had been struck in the groin, and it was an Arabian arrow, and there were pearls on it; and when I had made an incision between two ribs, and it was already submerged in the groin of the patient; and I was discreet with that, and I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the belly, and I thought he would die from that; and when three days had passed and there had been no improvement in his condition, I made an incision on the arrow and pulled it out, and he was healed, and there was no further injury to him
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had been struck in two places, and consolidated is the swelling over them, and when I approached him to set him at ease, he died immediately, and the arrow was extracted from the root of the thigh
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in the belly, and the swelling was consolidated around it, and it was not altered by her natural processes, and the woman did not suffer any further from her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and the swelling was consolidated and the arrow was broken, without any further pain, and he seemed to recover from that condition.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king who had been struck in the middle of his nose, and it had already declined to the black bile a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to care for him shortly after the arrow was extracted within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I stopped the swelling of the arrow wound without any stretching; and then I inquired about the sensation of pain, and he did not feel any; more he felt a tingling sensation left by the tip of the arrow, and I hoped that that tingling sensation was due to the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied to the place a plaster which has an adhesive and digestive virtue, trusting that the part will return to its normal position because of the action of that plaster on the arrow wound, because it dries up over that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant injury to the part except that caused by the arrow; and I continued to keep the plaster on it for several days and there was no further injury; and the swelling was consolidated and the patient recovered from the pain of the arrow wound within a few days, since on the following day he could feel the arrow no longer in his nose and he confirmed that to me
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I discontinued the acute corrosive plaster for several days until I saw an improvement, and when I tried it I found that the tip of the arrow adhered to the thigh.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I replaced the plaster with this new medicine until I saw the tip of the arrow visibly, and I left it like that for some time, for about four months
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the swelling had increased, I thought it would be possible to remove the forceps from it, and I did so, and did not observe any further pain; however, I did not cease to be discreet and skillful in my handling of that area, until one day, when I was handling it in the way I had learned, I managed to extract the arrow; and then I restored the wound
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors say that the cartilage of the nose is not restored; and I restored that and the swelling was consolidated, and the patient was completely healed, and I do not remember any further occurrence of that kind of suffering
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extracting any arrow, for you should pause and explain clearly what is not mentioned in this narrative, since the parts of this art and the definitions of this do not agree with the narration or with your free understanding
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And wise artists compare little with great things; and in what is present there is something absent; and they find new operations and new instruments which descend from the causes outside the art when an accident occurs
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore I say that arrows are not expelled from the limbs in which they are placed except in two ways: either by attraction of the place where they are pierced; or on the contrary, by the other side
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	The pain that arises from the area where the bones meet, or from the inward of the flesh, is expelled and driven out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not obey the time of the catgut, the hour commands that you leave it lying for a few days until the surrounding flesh has healed, and that its attraction and discharge be relieved.</end_of_turn>
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is stuck in bone and you do not obey the time, the hour leaves it lying for a few days and iterates with its attraction and movement in every day, and it is expelled.</end_of_turn>
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey your time within a few days, the hour commands that you perforate in the course of the arrow in that bone from its entirety until the bone is made flexible by the arrow, and then extract it.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already descended into one of the belly of the brain, and appears in the illness at the same time as those accidents which you mentioned, the hour advises you to abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it in peace until it is equal to several days; for if the arrow remains in the head, the hour does not advise prolonging death.</end_of_turn>
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck in the head of the bone but only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the skull, and remains in the illness for several days, and no other accident occurs with it, the hour recommends that you engage in the attraction of the arrow and in the attraction of its head.</end_of_turn
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if it is not stuck and you do not obey the extraction, the hour recommends that you give salves in the course of the arrow as we have recommended, and that you care for the area until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Maybe if the arrow has already disappeared in the body of the limb, and is hidden from the feeling, the hour asks you to inquire about it, and if you find it, the hour pulls it out with those instruments that are convenient for the attraction of it.</end_of_turn>
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the period, and here neither bone nor nerve nor vein, the hour advises you to wait for the plague to be amplified until it is possible to extract the arrow.</end_of_turn
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have other things which you consider, which are urgent, the hour recommends that you break the flesh in which it is stuck entirely with all the skill you can; and think about it, if you cannot do better than evacuate the flesh from the fracture of the ankles and the twisting of those until you obey.</end_of_turn
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place, the hour uses with all its force at all times to make that work; and whisper that the arrow is not fractured and that it is easily attracted and extracted.</end_of_turn
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that of your hour, the hour leaves it lying for a few days until the parts that are around it have healed, and then iterates that the hour is relieved.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Maybe if you do something contrary to the flow of custom, the hour recommends that you administer what has been said about care in the head.</end_of_turn
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your vigilance from the beginning of the vein or nerve, or string, and administer instruments in every way possible to facilitate the evacuation of the arrow; and do it with ease, tranquility, delay and firmness as I have said and you have recommended.</end_of_turn
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore make the arrow go out contrary to its figure so that the illness is in accordance with the figure according to which you must order the evacuation of the arrow, which is more helpful.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Maybe if that is not possible for you, the hour recommends that you do what is possible for you according to the figures.</end_of_turn
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Maybe the arrows which are expelled contrary to the other side, or which already proceed from one side to the other, or make the transmission of the arrow difficult because of the sensation of the side which is below the hip bone and sometimes that eminent; then you must abstain from that; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp; and then pull it out, because it is lighter at this time.</end_of_turn
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Maybe if it is retained in the bone, the hour recommends that you twist the limb contrary to the custom until the arrow presses against the bone, and expand it halfway, and then extract it.</end_of_turn
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Or leave it lying for a few days, and then repeat that until it heals.</end_of_turn>
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the head of the arrow is in that place, the hour recommends that you pierce that with it.</end_of_turn
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May it be that if the fever has subsided and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert your finger and, if it is numb, stir cautiously so that between the concavity of the thumb and the heel you may impel that which is in it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the thumb is concave, then insert your finger forcefully so that the thumb is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the thumb is poisoned, then you must cover the entire area where the pain is with your hand, if you can, and then care for that which you suspect
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the thumb hurts in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to causing you to touch that area, then touch that with your finger and if possible drain that, for it will prevent infection of the vein or nerve, and extract that, and then compress that until it has healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which the thumbs are grasped:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their extremities are like the beak of a sparrow, which are firm like a saw when they grasp the thumb so that it does not slip away
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are various forms of forceps, large, small, medium and small, according to the quantity of the greatness of the thumb and its scarcity, and of the breadth of the wound, and of the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Method of pressing inwards of this limb as much as possible like the pain of a sparrow so that the inside of the thumb is relieved, and impulse of that which is numb:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of pressing inwards of the numb limb
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like this so that the inside of the thumb which is concave is relieved and is driven out by that
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of the flebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins which are usually flebotomized are those of the foot, hand, belly and chest of which there are sixteen in total There are two pulse veins which are close to the ankles, which are called the palpebral veins; two veins which are in the two temporal regions which appear; two veins which are in two tear ducts of two holes which are called the lacrimal veins; the vein which is prepared in the middle of the face, and the vein which is in the extremity of the nose; two veins which are in the cheek; two veins which are in the lower lip; two veins which are in the upper lip; and these are the veins which are called the palpebral; and there are two veins which are in the tongue
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins which are flebotomized in the limbs are worth five for in those there is a cephalic vein, which is blind, and is called the “head vein”, which is a minor vein, which is composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; and people call that “the vein of the whole body”, and the basilica vein is stopped in the domestic lap, and is called “citellar”, and they call those which are in the belly “belly veins”; and the funis of the arm, which is stopped over the elbow, and is that in which flebotomy is performed, and that appears on the heel for its manifestation; and the great saphenous vein, which is between the thumb and the little finger, and there are two branches in it
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of which is that which is beyond the curvature of the heel of the outside; and the second is the saphenous, the place of which is beyond the thigh of the outside; and the sciatic vein, the place of which is beyond the thigh of the outside; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The support of the veins which are close to the ankles is for catarrh of the ancient times and emigration and safra and ulcers of the head of bad ancient times
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding these is as I recommend to you: that the head of the patient should be calm and the head of the patient in the occipital region where both veins are somewhat wide and have good friction; to strengthen the patient's head let him hold his chin with two fingers placed two finger-breadths below the head; and if you feel that two fingers are enough to hold it, here you will hold the hand.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take your needle lance, which is the one that is incisions, and insert that which is left of the vein in the bone so that the flebotomy comes out to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And elevate your hand to the vein and the bone to the sides and then you will puncture the vein at the incision point.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	The length of the incision should be equal to twice the width of two fingers, and do as much as you wish; and thus you will perform the operation safely.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then withdraw the powder and leave only that which has healed.</end_of_turn>
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And thus the incision of those and their cautery are completed.</end_of_turn>
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More than two veins or arteries which are at the temples help to prevent inflammation is an old emigration and is bad and excessive vomiting and abundance of acute effusions in the heel.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of the inflammation of those is as I recommend to you: constrict the patient's abdomen until two veins appear to be visible in the sentiment of their appearance and when they are shown to be present; and when you are certain, then do what you desire.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then elevate the limb above the vein towards the buttocks as I have indicated, and introduce the inflammation into the body through the incision, and elevate the vein again; and make the incision in the same way as you did with the other two veins; and do as much as you wish of the operation.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then remove the covering of the patient, and rest your hand on the vein for an hour, and then rest over the wound and the powder and tighten that which is under your hand, and leave only that which has healed.</end_of_turn
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And thus the memory of those things is completed, and the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the operation.</end_of_turn
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the benefit of the inflammation of the vein of the forehead is similar to the inflammation of the cephalic vein to the ancient illnesses of the face and emigration and swelling and ulcers that are fetid.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the inflammation of those is as I recommend to you; so that the patient grasps the abdomen with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take an instrument which is called forceps of which this is the form.</end_of_turn
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture at the tip of the forceps over that vein and perforate it either forward or backward in the manner of the hand; and leave the wound to run as much as you wish; and then remove the perforation of the abdomen and tighten that which has healed.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Many veins are opened with the inflammation, but do not think that the inflammation is of acute extremity as well as the others; for it is of remote extremity, and the inflammation is in proportion to the breadth of the os which is proper and firm in it when the inflammation is subtle.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More useful are the two veins which are at the corners of two heels for scabbing of the heel for swelling and swelling in the heel, and for the illnesses of the face.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the inflammation is that the patient grasps the abdomen with a bandage, and immediately perform the inflammation of those things, and you remain standing over their head.</end_of_turn
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And thus the inflammation is successful according to the proportion of the length to the breadth of the inflammation, for in the place there is no bone; and if the inflammation is subtle, the limb is firm and the os is fractured.</end_of_turn
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then do as much as you wish of the operation, and rest over those wounds, and tighten those for a night, and then remove them.</end_of_turn
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More than the inflammation of the vein of the nose is with acute fever and violent vomiting, and with the illnesses of the face and emigration and swelling that occur in the face, and more when it is ancient.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the inflammation of those is that the patient grasps the abdomen and take hold of the nose with your left hand, and perform the inflammation slowly and leave it in the middle of the face according to the direction of the ruler, for the vein does not appear in this place, and the blood begins to flow freely.</end_of_turn
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover that the inflammation is done little by little and gradually let the blood run according to your need; and leave that for a night, for that is restored pleasantly.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	More useful is the inflammation of the two guide veins to constriction of ale and to the beginning of leprosy and to spots of illness and itching and corrosive ulcers just as herpotromen.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the inflammation of those is that the patient grasps something from the abdomen with his limbs; and let the artifiacts be over the head of the patient, and let the patient be sitting on a cushion.</end_of_turn
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then remove the ligature and tighten the two veins near the midpoint to prevent further bleeding, and leave the bandage inside until the wound has healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And in the treatment of phlebitis of the great veins, compare small apostemas and pustules of the mouth, corruption of the teeth, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the throat area.</end_of_turn>
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that it should cease the pain immediately, tighten the neck of the vein with a bandage, and then rotate the lips of the vein and ligate two veins, one from the right lip and the other from the left lip; and the sign of which is the blackness of either of them, and more especially when the two veins are black in the circuit of these.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is any doubt, you may leave it to the incision of the greater of these, and the sign that will manifest itself from these.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make them resemble the two veins that are in the lips above.</end_of_turn>
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is more common to ligate the two veins that are in the lip than to leave them.</end_of_turn>
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More useful than ligating two veins that are left in the tongue is the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein to prevent affections that are in the gullet, to the disease of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.</end_of_turn>
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of phlebotomizing these is that it should follow the pain between your teeth right away, elevate the tongue, and restrain the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each is tending towards blackness.</end_of_turn
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And so phlebotomize each; and take care that you do not touch the vein with your hand, for you may leave them as arteries.</end_of_turn
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And these veins which are phlebotomized in the groin are those in which blood usually runs in all men, and the phlebotomy of these is useful in two ways, or by making a small puncture of the skin with a needle or by making a small incision with a lancet; or by pressing on the puncture with the thumb and index finger, and this is the way to do it.</end_of_turn
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is because it agrees with the section and those species of veins and subtleties according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the stricture of these.</end_of_turn>
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of small puncture:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Both thumbs and index fingers are to be used as many times as necessary, and you must open the veins that appear flattened and contain a large amount of blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way of making a large puncture
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This phlebotomy is of smaller breadth and more subtle, and is suitable for phlebotomy of small veins that contain subtle blood clots.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	More useful is the phlebotomy of the basilica vein which is one of the three veins: which extract the blood of the affections that are left in the gullet and the neck, and of what is left of the legs and the belly.</end_of_turn
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is necessary for the phlebotomist, when he phlebotomizes that, to guard well and be cautious in that, because if he does not, he may leave the artery open, and if he is mistaken in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will puncture that artery and blood will flow, so that you must avoid that by cutting as little as possible.</end_of_turn
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear to be obvious, then you must leave that one and move to the other, or that you seek any branch whatever; or that you phlebotomize in place of it at the end of the arm, which is also obvious; and cut that one with the phlebotomy as well as we have said.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	More if you wish to perform the phlebotomy of the median nerve, then you must precede by guarding the stricture of the arm that touches the area inside where you begin the area of the forearm; and then put on a bandage over that; and then tie the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision with the phlebotomy as we have said; and take care that the percussion does not extend to the space of the artery.</end_of_turn
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you stretch the ligament, an inflammation occurs in the place that you have marked, for that inflammation is of the artery, and therefore it swells up.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	When sometimes the blood flows in the swelling like urine of a child, and the blood is thick like barley, know that it is the blood of the artery; and when you see that the swelling has extended for a long distance, stop the hand that you have placed over that area; and if the blood is split, that is to say if there are clots, remove them; for if the blood is split, the hand which you have stretched will leave it behind.</end_of_turn>
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Beware the patient from the discharge of their urine, and do not fear them for a few days until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Maybe if the blood is not split, and sometimes even if you do not wish it, you must pierce the artery if it appears to you; for the limb will be contracted, and the blood will be split; or that you take a short fist, and do so, and take a little powder and stretch that over the place of the vein which is strictured with the ligament and the pulp within to the other day.</end_of_turn
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is split, it is not good; otherwise, keep that which preceded the recollection of the place of the split veins flowing blood.</end_of_turn
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The split of the blood of the limb is difficult in masses of blood due to the smallness of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.</end_of_turn>
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More of the veins are useful for draining blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for they are composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalic, as we have said.</end_of_turn
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And cover the phlebotomist who is over-anxious in the phlebotomy of the limb, for that one is a nerve; and when you touch the puncture of the phlebotomy and find the nerve, you will cause him to faint, and it is difficult for him to recover, and he will not be completely healed. And this nerve is visible in some people and is thin and not visible; so cover that the phlebotomist does not prick the nerve with his sharpness.</end_of_turn
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you must cut the vein lengthwise.</end_of_turn
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws out the blood of the head and relieves the evils of the heels.</end_of_turn
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And take care of this in this way, if you want the phlebotomist to prick with the phlebotomy olive oil or with the phlebotomy myrtle; for this is the best remedy for all the veins, for it is not to prick the artery or the nerve.</end_of_turn
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must know that you must not prick the head of the bone too much only with the phlebotomy, but seek the place that is most likely to yield blood, and do not notice it, if it is not seen at the first percussion that there are some clots in the phlebotomy.</end_of_turn
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is often seen in some people that when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, it is not noticed afterwards.</end_of_turn
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the phlebotomy of this and its accidents must be considered in their rectification.</end_of_turn
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	It must be known that phlebotomy is not administered except in the conservation of health and in the hope of health and caution in the event of the occurrence of diseases, and that it is useful phlebotomy in one of the veins that is in the groin, that is to say: cephalic, femoral and basilica; and that it is useful phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in the spring and in the autumn, and in winter almost with food, when there is a significant sign of replenishment.</end_of_turn
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it is useful to phlebotomize every three days or at most once a day after three hours have passed.</end_of_turn
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy that is administered must cause convenience and necessity in this, or at night or day, in all hours and at all times.</end_of_turn
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it must be known that children should not be phlebotomized until they are thirteen years old, and women should not be phlebotomized except after the fourth month of the seventh month, and old people should not be phlebotomized who have already passed their eightieth year.</end_of_turn
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, it must be modified by placing a sponge over the belly before the phlebotomy, if there is a clot retained in it, so that the veins are not injured by the surplus of blood that is pushed out, and that they do not cause damage to the principal members.</end_of_turn
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E non sia mai sospetto ai pazienti naucea sacertiva e crapula, né fugiat malathia né ebretatem usque quando iste fiat remanugut iste de lor, né malathia de i dropici, ma più che la fleubotomia sia temuta aprop colica passio et aprop vomit, et aprop cos de ventre, et aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e d’esercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de quanta causa Dissolve y restore la virtute, o sia corpore28 o animali.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider carefully the composition of the humors before healing, if it is appropriate with foods and drinks, and with medicines if possible.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And in this way, if no other cause hinders, or if excited by any exercise, so that the healing be subtle
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And suspend the vomiting in their feet at the third hour, as we have said before
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And order that the feet of that person be guarded on that day in all kinds of adversity, as in case of distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as well as in case of work, excessive grief, and thirst, and other similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And let there be present with her the causes which usually accompany men, such as aromaticness, odor, fat, and resemblance to those according to the quantity of possibility
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist over a cushion that is thicker than the cushion of that which must be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then draw out their arms, and cool the hand of the phlebotomist with two or three wicks; and tighten the ligature with a cord and encircle with two wicks.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the constraint should be temperate, because the excessive constraint, when not equal, hinders the flow of the healing; or is too great, for it hinders the course of the healing.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the constraint is over, let the one who is to be phlebotomized cool their hands between their thighs until the veins are swollen, and declare it to the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the phlebotomist take a little oil from the patient with his left hand immediately; and stop the patient’s hand by indicating his left hand over that vein from which the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein escapes a little, and the percussion is calmed because it is the vein that has escaped that is causing the phlebotomy, and that is full of air, and when the phlebotomist places his hand over that one, it is contracted by the phlebotomy, and is discerned by the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it does open, that one is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, in order that the phlebotomist be stopped and is requested in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And so suspend the phlebotomy, even if the vein is broken in a wick, for it is not good; or if so, repeat it another time and leave that place a little, or feed it if the place is not relaxed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is relaxed, or the disease is scattered, leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligature, for it may cause excessive bleeding, or do not enter the bath
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the healing is proceeding well, and you fear that the amount that you want to recover will not be enough, then repeat the phlebotomy in that place according to custom and adjust a little in the opening, and do so until the place is relaxed, for the place is relaxed in many people in case of little opening
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And even if sometimes that is relaxed, do not repeat over it, for it is not useful to you in any way; and suspend over that every part of the wound of the oil, for it relieves the course of the healing.</end_turn>
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place than oil and the others oils.</end_turn>
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And in like manner administer oil to the wound in all phlebotomies from which the veins are escaping due to the prohibition of the course of healing, and make it thick like porridge and slimy when it is stopped from one of those on the place, for the healing is subtle and is reversed when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the phlebotomy great swelling is engendered, which several wicks have caused, especially if it has not bled except that wick, or in the little opening of the vein, then you should cover it and suspend over that place a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scraped off, and press that for an hour, for it is dissolved.</end_turn
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that area with a sheet or blanket in accordance with the location of the vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If you remain in the place for a few days, any black or green swelling will not be noticed; and if you wish, stop any cause of pain, such as aloes or myrrh dissolved in vinegar, or any cause of spasm of the mind or of cramps or something similar to these.</end_of_turn>
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The veins are well-bled away, after which abscesses and swellings must be removed by incision of the basilica.</end_of_turn>
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore place your hand over that area, and if you find it to be painful, put your compression over that area, for that swelling is harmful and bad; and now keep your hand over that any cause of that which we have said, because a strong flow of blood comes from the main artery.</end_of_turn
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And cover with something that is adhesive to the area where the bleeding stops, so that the place becomes firm, and then take care of the other care that is necessary to make it healthy.</end_of_turn
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And extract from the vein all the blood according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the blood remaining in the vein according to how it appears.</end_of_turn>
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the vein is black, then leave it to rot until it is well-healed; and in the same way if you see it large, leave it to rot until it is delicate; and in the same way if it is acute, until the acuteness is gone.</end_of_turn
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And cover whoever is full and strong and has need of an extraction of a vein in a hurry, that the incision of the vein be increased and that the bleeding be copious.</end_of_turn
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in the case of a woman, do the opposite of that, and cover that she should be extracted in small numbers, and that her wound should be slight.</end_of_turn
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best thing in the bleeding of a vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.</end_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of bleeding is safe from the flow of blood and from the injury of nerves, and is more useful and safer than bleeding by width and length.</end_of_turn
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is customary to happen without fainting, do the bleeding; and cover that you cure that beforehand by applying a little piece of bread soaked in wine instead of a thousand grains or of simple salt; and extract from the vein three times or four.</end_of_turn
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold complexion, cover that beforehand by applying vinegar of myrrh or vinegar of honey aromatic with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in aromatic vinegar and fragrant.</end_of_turn
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting happens, do the bleeding; and this is a cause of its sudden loss of blood; cover that you should precede by drinking lukewarm water and aromatic vinegar; and use of aromatic herbs and be sure to tie the limbs together with that.</end_of_turn
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division on fainting for evacuation.</end_of_turn
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to make the evacuation of the blood more effective and dissolve the blood according to its quantity, cover that from which bleeding is for the most part, and the virtue of that is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, so as to do according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.</end_of_turn
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Whoever wants to make the evacuation of the blood more effective, and to keep the blood strong, do that for the seventh or ninth time from the first bleeding.</end_of_turn
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Whoever wants to withdraw the blood from the body contrary to the part from which it descends, cover that it should be done on the second or third day.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Whoever in that body in which there is already blood clotted and is acute and causes the fever, cover that the blood should be bled out once and a great amount should be bled out, and that the perception be increased until fainting occurs, because you have preserved all the conditions of bleeding; and that you place your hand over the pulse of the body, because if you do not do this, death may occur instead of fainting, because sometimes the bledder is ignorant and negligent.</end_of_turn
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not cover when you want to loosen the arms and evacuate the blood according to the quantity, as the orifice of the vein is closed and it is difficult to stop the bleeding, that you prefer that over that intensity and extend your hand widely, because that is too bad.</end_of_turn
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it until it is bled according to the method; or remain with the intensity of the bleeding that is clotting of the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place your hand over that of tyriaca alfarach, or of sage, and compress that until the blood is out and gone.</end_of_turn
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is clotted, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the clot has dissolved.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary to evacuate the abscess according to the rules, and this is not an excuse, then leave that abscess on that limb or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "funis brachiatus" is easily clotted in the place of the lymph or the fatty tissue, when it is not obstructed or hidden, which is composed of these things
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the phlebotomy of these people is that the patient puts their hand in cold water until the pain disappears and the vein appears clearly
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then strengthen the limb with a tight ligature around the middle; and perform the phlebotomy according to the small transverse, not horizontally or along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the opening be wide and your phlebotomy be on the part of the hand just below the wrist
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the abscess is prohibited, then repeat the hand in cold water and let the abscess flow into the water until you have achieved your purpose
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Maybe if you were in the summer days, then you would be excused from the repetition of the hand in cold water, and the more so when the body of the abscess is in cold water in winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The phlebotomy of this vein is more safe than that of all the others, for there is neither a pulsating vein nor nerves in it
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The phlebotomy of the wrist is related to the diseases of the foot
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the phlebotomy of these people is that you strengthen the limb with a tight ligature or with your hand, since you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is swollen and is clearly visible; and then perform the phlebotomy on the transverse; and if you prick it in this way it does not cause any pain in return
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep that you do not touch your hand with the phlebotomy, for it leaves the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And repeat the hand in cold water and let the abscess run in it, for if you do not repeat it in cold water, the abscess will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When the abscess is extracted according to the quantity of need, then leave the vein covered with oil and salt, so that it is not solidified too much; and immediately cover that you have made a complete wound
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	More useful is the phlebotomy of the left hand, as it is related to the diseases of the heel.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same thing in the phlebotomy of these people as you did in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the phlebotomy of the median vein is for the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, as well as for major diseases, such as retention of menstruation, and the diseases of the veins and ulcers of the buttocks and old wounds, and the like of these
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the phlebotomy of these people is that the patient puts the whole foot into cold water and makes over that friction until the veins appear; and leaves over the wrist joint with the vein appearing from under the skin, and the part of the vein that is seen outside must be grasped by the thumb and the four fingers of the hand.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, phlebotomy is better with a wide opening or by leaving the limb over the ankle rather than by causing the accumulation of blood in the limb which is more harmful and salty
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you phlebotomize on the face of the foot, then you must take care of the nerves that are left over on the face of the foot, and stop your phlebotomy at the level where you phlebotomize, as if you were going to prick it
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And so be it.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is prohibited to drain the abscess; then repeat the foot in cold water and let the abscess run in it until it is evacuated
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy a little later, because the limb is salty; and do not be afraid of it, but take care of the nerves as we have said
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same thing with the other foot in the same way
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	As for the sciatic vein, the part as we have said is over the heel of the heel bone.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The benefit of flebotomy in such cases is to do it when the cause is known to be from caut.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the flebotomy is that the patient groans in pain, contracts and tightens the flesh of his belly up to the navel, and keeps it pressed down by four fingers on a long strap, which does not appear except in such cases.</end_of_turn>
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when it appears, do the flebotomy according to each case, as to the vessel, and it is better; or insert it by incision or extract it by incision, because the location is outside.</end_of_turn>
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men more hidden; and if you find it and it does not appear to the feeling of all, do the flebotomy of some branch of it, and that is the one that appears in the two of the foot between the heel and the ankle.</end_of_turn
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Beware of the nerves, and make the incision run smoothly as much as you wish.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the stricture and place your hand over the area of the flebotomy to keep it firm, because it is healing.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From the instructions and qualities of its use.</end_of_turn>
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Winds are of corn, or of hemp, or of ivy.</end_of_turn>
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And the wind is useful in two ways: the one is by sacrifice and extraction of blood, and the other is by incision.</end_of_turn
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this incision that is by sacrifice is done in two ways, either by fire or by knife.</end_of_turn>
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the winds that are administered with sacrifice and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which one in which winds are stopped is the ankle; and the middle part of the thigh; and winds from the mouth go beyond the jaw; and winds of two spatulas; and winds of alohoster, which is over the heel; and winds of two flames; and winds of two bras; and winds of two cavities; and winds of two nails.</end_of_turn
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the wound does not extract blood from the great veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for this it does not possess the power for these; just as is the case with flebotomy; neither does it suffice that the incision should be made by fire or by knife in any disease that is not cured by the evacuation of all the blood from the body.</end_of_turn
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Maybe if necessary we will cause an incision for disease or for continuing, let us administer it at the beginning and at the end of the month, and in the middle and at any time.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of which is that in many men in whom blood is multiplied to such an extent that they do not digest the extraction by incision and find in the head a great gravity and sadness; and in those the finding is repletion and swelling in the face and head, and in the chest; and in those the finding is itching in the face and front of the head, and darkness and debility in the legs; and in those who vomit the place of their incision; and in those whose laughter is multiplied; and in those who find a bad taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue is swollen and spitting blood; and in those whose sleep is multiplied, and in those who see blood in their sleep swelling, old age, spots and other causes that remain with them.</end_of_turn
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when in any case of these, and properly when it is in the third or half of the month, it is commanded that the wound should be made more beneficial than it was passed over two or three hours ago.</end_of_turn
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The benefit of the incision of the nape is that when this confers gravity to the head and to the belly; more than that, it is that it is almost the evacuation of all the body.</end_of_turn
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this incision is in the place of the cephalic flebotomy.</end_of_turn>
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not proper that it should be used by anyone who is fatigued or in whom is catarr, because it gives great harm to that.</end_of_turn
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And because of this it does not suffice that it should be used by the old, and in the heads of those in whom there are feverish diseases.</end_of_turn
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More than that, if on that one should continue with it, it is beneficial to forget; and for this it is commanded that you order the cauturer to stop his hand a little with the vein at the edges, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.</end_of_turn
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And the incision of alochohel is in the place of the flebotomy of the jugular and of the basilica: and for this it confers to spasm, and to the constriction of bile and to the scissura of the suffering of bile, and to coughs, and to repletion.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The wind that proceeds from the alekel, if it is stopped, generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The exhalation of vinegar causes headaches, ophthalmia, diarrhea, and toothache; it is in place of the quibble of the bile.</end_of_turn>
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And let the exhaler keep his hand away from the scarification so that he does not wound the artery and cause blood to flow excessively.</end_of_turn>
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The exhalation causes nausea in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and remains of the diseases that are in the mouth; it is in place of the purging of the bile that is in the two lips.</end_of_turn>
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Better is the exhalation that is made over the two spatulas than that which is made over the head, which is useful for replacing heat.</end_of_turn
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The exhalation from the armpits brings relief from the phlebotomy of three veins, that is, of the basilica, jugular and cephalic, for those that accompany the blood from all those veins that are more abundant in the body, and those smaller veins that are among the larger ones until they reach the attraction of the three veins.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the exhaler not to proceed too much with the scarification, for the location is denuded of flesh, and leave the nerves and arteries.</end_of_turn
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a wind that is exhaled over the cushions and causes hemorrhoids in the buttocks and ulcers afterwards.</end_of_turn
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And let the exhaler take a great breath, and that it be from the chest, for the location digests of great heat; and take away the slight exhalations and perform the scarification with a scarification.</end_of_turn
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Better are the great winds from the armpits rather than the small ones, for they bring blood to all the body, and relieve ancient pains of the coughs and of the belly, and of the bladder; and they cause the menses, and relieve swelling and pain; and they are in place of the purging of two large veins, and of the vomiting, and of two cavities.</end>
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, do not let them do all this throughout the body, for it makes the pulse accelerate in many people.</end_of_turn>
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the exhalations from the armpits bring relief that is proportional to the relief of the winds of two armpits.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the winds is that it stops the initial exhalation and lets out a temperate exhalation, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but rather pause them leisurely, and remain in them moderately, and that the humors arrive at the location immediately to follow.</end_of_turn
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease this until you see the location already shrink and swell and that the color of the blood returns.</end_of_turn
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you have finished the scarification, repeat the exhalation slowly and gradually, and pay attention to the condition of the body.</end_of_turn
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a person who has tender flesh of rare pores, command that you do him a single scarification and no more, for the location is not to be ulcerated.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the exhaler to expand the scarification a a moderate degree and breathe slowly, and do not hold your breath.</end_of_turn
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickness in the blood, then command that you make two incisions, for in the first incision open the way for the subtiliation of the blood and the moisture of it.</end_of_turn
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Better is the second to the piercing of the extraction of the thick blood.</end_of_turn
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is not thick, then command that you make a third incision so that you can achieve the fourth degree.</end_of_turn
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when you wish to extract the blood slowly or a little, suffice with a single scarification.</end_of_turn
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you wish to extract a lot of blood, make several incisions; and if you know that the blood is thick, then command that you make a transverse incision.</end_of_turn
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the end of the incisions is only the depth of the groove.</end_of_turn
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that from which the groove is large, hard, tough, and has narrow pores, command that the locations of the incisions be oiled with gentler unguents, resolving; if it is in summer, thus as olive oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of rosemary buds, or almond oil; and if it is in winter, then oil of nutmeg, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of alum.</end_of_turn
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is great, hot, then let it be applied with marigold, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and so forth.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the wind is strong from wide fields of barley, then let it be forbidden to apply oil, and let instead the parts of the wind be washed with vinegar or cold water of the sun, or with water of lilies, or with water of meadows, and so on.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And as for him from whom the moisture is excessive, wash his windings with wine vinegar, or with water of myrtle, sumac, and so on like those.</end_of_turn>
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And as for him from whom the excess is great, wash his windings with strong vinegar, or with water of rue, which is elderberry, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and so on like those.</end_of_turn>
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And let the wind be kept away from the bath; having said that, let it be administered alongside the bath for an hour or two, and let it rest alongside the bath.</end_of_turn
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that is useful to return the wind from a phlebotomy before the wound?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Let us consider at the outset: if the wind or the one who must perform the phlebotomy is coleric and has a wound over him acute and inflamed, then let us anticipate frigid causes, such as many vinegar and lettuce, and sage, and fennel, and chamomile, and so on like those.</end_of_turn>
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And abstain from foods such as poultry, fatty meats, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and the like.</end_of_turn
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And as for him from whom the complexion is hot, let us anticipate the use of cold baths, or of cold decoction of sage seed, sumac, and fragrant herbs between wool and linen; and let him be recommended to drink little and eat sparingly, and abstain from poultry, meat, fish, eggs, almonds, and cabbage.</end_of_turn
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And let the drinks be greater in the day of the wind and phlebotomy than the food.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let him be given in drinking water in several hours before breakfast, or medicine of musk, such as muskroot, or alum, before or alongside the wind or phlebotomy or alongside, so that the principal parts are comforted and the wound is soothed; and let them not take vinegar or wine.</end_of_turn
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	And the winds which are harmful are those which irritate the chest, and the foot, and the navel, in the joints, and the scrotum, because these members suffer from no sacrifice.</end_of_turn
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those except for the attraction of the wound of a member, as when a wind is held over a wound of the body in a disease of excessive flow of humors from the head; and they use it so that the cold wind is dissolved from the member, as when it is held over the belly and the navel; because thereby the member is softened and the pain that resolves the cold wind is removed.</end_of_turn
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already said concerning the hiccups when they happen together with vomiting, because by their attraction a strong wind is produced which evacuates vomiting from its place.</end_of_turn
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when it is held over the chest and the foot, it expels the cold wind in those closed spaces.</end_of_turn>
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These winds are administered cold with vinegar only; and some are administered with fire.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of cold water in the diseases of the foot.</end_of_turn
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the wind must be full and great, so it is cold water alone or cold water in which appropriate herbs are boiled.</end_of_turn>
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wind administered with fire: the breadth of the orifice of two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of resin is that of a palm; and let it be placed on the flank, in the place where it is in the circuit, as much as it can hold, the neck be small according to the quantity that enters it with a needle.</end_of_turn
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let there be applied vinegar or lemon, marigolds, laurel, ginger and ivy for so that it does not make the member move from its place over it.</end_of_turn
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be placed between the thumb and the little finger a sponge or iron, where a candle is held with the fire.</end_of_turn
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this wind be much greater than the one we have recommended; and let little be taken of that according to the diseases and the condition of the one who uses it.</end_of_turn
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The winds of the elderly are more widespread than those of the young and of robust bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of placing this wind on the limb is that it extends the flame towards the wood with a slight touch of candle wax, and place that above the middle of the transverse vein in the middle area of the wind, so that the flame is kindled around the edge, so that it does not burn the body of the patient.</end_of_turn>
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And so it should be kept on the limb of the patient, and it is said that when we have said these things, when we have the winds and do not order that they stop and that the vapor escapes from that wound, the wind will be so dispersed.</end_of_turn>
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And so we light the flame according to its custom, and repeat that if you order it thus.</end_of_turn>
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the wind that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or wound, and is not administered except that it be full of water, and is placed on the limb alone.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the way: And this wind, the more it is great, the better, because it receives a great quantity of water.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xcvii.	(The text ends here)</end_of_turn>
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood does not flow in all limbs, but only in those in which the position of the wind is not possible due to their small size, thus as with the thumb and little finger; or in limb denuded of flesh, as it is said of the nose and nails, and in such cases.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those which you have found in the deep waters of poppy flowers.</end_of_turn
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And so they should be left lying down day and night in deep water until they are faint, and that no cause remain in their belly; and that you evacuate the body at the beginning with a phlebotomy and with winds; and that you cool the limb until it turns red; and that you place them over it.</end_of_turn
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And thus they are full and cases.</end_of_turn
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to extract the area from the wind, it is better later in treatment.</end_of_turn
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, the hours wash the area with cold water and add a little more; and keep it cool and squeezed.</end_of_turn
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the duration of the treatment is prolonged, add to the case of bloodletting, and when that is done, put on a cold pack in the water, and place that on it until the discharge is finished.</end_of_turn
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the disease is multiplied, the hours sprinkle over it powdered vitriol, or urine and it resembles the causes of stagnation, until the disease is expelled; or that you place over the area the masses of scraped honeycombs, and that you leave them until the honeycombs adhere to the area, and the disease is expelled.</end_of_turn
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the bloodletting, when possible change those.</end_of_turn
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited, the hours keep the limb fresh or leave a needle in the area until the disease has gone away; and so they are placed, so that when any disease should happen again it is supported.</end_of_turn
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to close, sprinkle over those a little barley flour or salt, or ash, and close tightly.</end_of_turn
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus ends the procedure of the third part: restoration.</end_of_turn>
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very useful necessary in the art of medicine; and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation of bones.</end_of_turn
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, wise men, listen to me! The fools of doctors, the vulgarians, and those who at some time do not remember the ancients or do not read their books.</end_of_turn
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is useful that this manner of science on our land is private; and I have not forgotten it at any time in my life; and I have not omitted anything from it, except for the length of reading the works of the ancients and studying to understand them, until I have extracted the science from them.</end_of_turn
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And so I direct to experiment and study throughout my life.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and about which I have experimented; since I have abbreviated it from you others and released you from the burden of lengthening; and I have opened it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown you at the end of the declaration; and I have formed in you various forms of the ailments that are administered in this way, as it is done in addition to the declaration, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.</end>
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection of this fracture of the bones, from which it is necessary to make a preliminary statement before we proceed to the description of the fractured limbs and their various conditions.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us speak in the preface of this chapter of the sums of the speech; and the chapters to understand of which in the beginning is forced to learn the artifices and to be fixed on the truth of those things; so you and those who know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Therefore I say that when an accident occurs to a fracture or dislocation or twist or casement, it is necessary to start immediately with bleeding or to apply a bandage, or whatever, if you do not prevent any cause, even if it be with the greatest virtue, or if it be an infant, or an old person in decrepitude, or if it be a time of great heat or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And so be content in food with fresh herbs and fish and crab; and prohibit large meats and fill them out with foods and all food that fills the veins of health, within that you are sure of the after-effect of the cautery, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter from the limb.</end_of_turn>
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And so return the patient to their first position as they usually do.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Therefore when the bone is being restored, it is necessary that the patient be given nourishing and nutritious food that is not too thick and difficult to digest, such as porridge made with flour and water, broth, eggs, fish, beef, almonds, and peas, and in this regimen there is a coagulation of the fracture that is more tenacious and lasting.</end_of_turn
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you must know that bones break when they are in the homes that are in the first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they should continue and be consolidated according to their nature except for the dehydration of the limbs.</end_of_turn>
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times by the dehydration of those limbs, and they continue and are consolidated those that are of them at the end of the convalescence, as in the bones of small infants.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	More importantly, however, nature adjusts and remembers that the fractured bone of any kind that remains swollen and tense adheres to that which adheres to it until it is congealed and united together, until the end of inflammation and convalescence, as fire is at the beginning, until any cause does not prevent it from doing its work.</end_of_turn
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to rest the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and large, as we have said.</end_of_turn
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many different fractures according to the diversity of the limb.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you must know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limb, for example the fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the forearm; and similarly all the others are diverse among them.</end_of_turn
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I shall return with a reminder of all the species of fracture, which are explained in the different chapters of this book.</end_of_turn>
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many different fractures in general.</end_of_turn
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in their metaphysis; for example, a fractured bone in its star is different from one that occurs in its marrow; and a fractured bone is different from a fractured bone according to its length: and the fractures of the tibia and fibula are caused both by traumatic and untraumatic factors, just as it is in writing when it is prepared to be written, and is a fractured bone with plaque and disruption in the head, and is a slight fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species there is a peculiar remedy or treatment in the restoration of the limb as will be reminded in the different places.</end_of_turn
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of fracture of the bone.</end_of_turn
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this it is known that a fracture of the bone: there is stiffness of the limb, and swelling and prominence of the limb to the touch, and pain when pressure is applied to it with the hand.</end_of_turn
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore when there is no apparent stiffness or when it is not believed to be present, do not touch the bone with your hand, for the patient does not experience great pain in that case.</end_of_turn
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There is also possible that it is a slight stiffness or a small fracture, in which case you must not touch it with your hand or compress it; there must be rest from the medicines of which you have been reminded at that moment when it is convenient; and take care to avoid strangulation.</end_of_turn
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The pain that arises when the joints are affected by cold humors, which infiltrate every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, is commonly called gout by physicians.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If the swelling persists after the cautery treatment, let it rest for a few days until the swelling subsides; and in the meantime, apply any means that can lift and suspend the limb.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	It is better to restore and elevate the limb than to fracture the bone in which the discomfort originates.</start_of_turn>
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Therefore, remember this case for future reference.</start_of_turn>
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the limb is fractured in the bone, it is necessary to extend the limb in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or hold it with your hand if the limb is small; or bind it with two strings or one string and the hand.</start_of_turn>
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And keep the limb in the position in which it naturally rests, while the fractured parts are extended, for in this way you will prevent them from becoming swollen and causing further discomfort.</start_of_turn
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Be careful not to cause additional pain or injury to the patient during the treatment of the pain; and use the amount of force that is necessary to effectively perform the operation.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Take advantage of this opportunity to touch the patient's hand at that moment, and if there is any other cause, rectify it and suspend it to the extent of your ability.</start_of_turn
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid excessive extension and compression, just as wise doctors do when performing cautery treatment, for this can cause swelling in the limb.</start_of_turn
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And finally, take note of the following: apply cold compresses, equators, and gentle traction to the limb, and rest and tranquility; inform the patient about the treatment and have them rest during the night and day, and observe their progress and pain; and do everything in your power to prevent any movement of the limb; and change the position of the limb if necessary, so that no discomfort is caused; and keep the limb in a relaxed and comfortable position, so that the limb does not suffer from any deformation when restored.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the limb's traction is that which you will recommend; for you know that fractured limbs are diverse in size and shape.</start_of_turn
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And as for those that are small, such as the arm, the finger, and the toe, it is necessary to wrap them with a soft bandage.</start_of_turn
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	As for those that are large, such as the thigh or the forearm, it is necessary to wrap them with a firm bandage, which will securely connect the large parts to the small parts with the engagement of the surrounding tissue.</start_of_turn
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And finally, start by evacuating the fracture, and then apply appropriate traction to the limb with three or four bandages as necessary; and hold the limb firmly with your hand.</start_of_turn
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Observe the most elevated part of the fracture location, and tighten the traction more than necessary to ensure the stability of the fractured area.</start_of_turn
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And gradually lengthen the bandage over the fracture location, and soften the traction gradually until a large part of the limb has been recovered.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another bandage and cover the other bandage over the fractured part with the previous bandage; and see that the bandages are placed at a distance from the fracture; and that your treatment is in the traction and softening of the bandage as we have said concerning the first bandage.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And if there is still discomfort in the limb, stop between the stops of the lion or leopard that supports the fracture, if there is discomfort; but if not, do not stop for any reason.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And stop again on the other side, and gently wrap over these bandages that are properly placed without causing swelling or cautery-induced swelling; and leave it for a few days; and in the meantime strengthen the surrounding area.</start_of_turn
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But that the staple which is placed over that fracture be bigger and wider than the others, and the length of the staple according to the size of the limb and its magnitude; and strengthen over the staple with another object as per your first instruction; and bind tightly as we have said above, that is, as much as the fracture is distant, and as much as it is prolonged.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And that the threads be of medium thickness and flexibility, and be of linen; and if the threads are coarse, thus also I have seen in the operation of alcus fols that they are taken out during the stitching of the wound, which is a great error, when they leave the stricture unequal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And subtle threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve a secure hold of the stricture with those that you wish; and do not cover that between two staples there should be less than a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is suffering from the edges of the staples, then immediately suspend the tightening in those places until they cause no further injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some wounds of fracture are like a wound, and an accident of disruption in the cord, and I remind you of this in the chapter concerning singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that every fractured limb is not straight from the first day; the cause of which is that when the limb is large, it does not suffice to rest on the staples but to wait a few days or more, according to your security of the advancement of healing of the cautery
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the manner in which the ancients restored the plaster which was placed over fracture, dislocation and twist.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Plastering method like that of restoring a fracture, convenient for multiple complex fractures and especially for women and men, because it is of that from which no heat nor cold arises: and take powder of wheat flour, which is the middle of the wheat that hangs over the germ of the wheat.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And comfort him thus if you can, but if there is an album of blood, stop the flow of it so that it does not thicken or become viscous; and use of that.</start_of_turn>
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manner of plastering for fractures, dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and marigold, which is ground from a thousand grains of licorice, five grains of myrrh and five grains of aloes; aloes twenty grains. All of these are crushed and sifted and mixed with water, either with oil or with egg white if the patient's wound is raw; and use this plaster, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones pleasantly, and gives confidence to many men.</end_of_turn>
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manner of plastering for which comfort is given for fracture and twist: recipe marigold and white alum at a rate of ten grains; myrrh and aloes at five grains; acacia five grains; linseed oil two grains. Twenty grains of vinegar.</end_of_turn
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these are crushed in a mortar with a rough stone, and are powdered, and are moistened with water or blood and is administered.</start_of_turn
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Plastering method for joints and separated bones in their place, and for pains caused by fractures and breaks: take fine linen thread and immerse it in vinegar and oil and place it over the area.</start_of_turn
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Note that this plaster is not of benefit for restoration, for cautery and expels pain properly.</start_of_turn
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores the fracture: take the leaves of fig tree out and the leaves of poppy seed saved; contain everything and make plaster of them.</start_of_turn
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida. sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have never seen anyone do this, for it is more reasonable that it does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: On fracture when it occurs in the head
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The varieties of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are diverse, for every fracture is caused by impact of space, and the impact hinders all the bone within the cavity, which is left in its place, just as happens in the forearm; and for this reason this kind is called spiral; or the space impacts any part of the bone, and impacts the marrow and does not pass through the back of the bone; and this kind of fracture is called elevation absolute.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of a fracture that is contracted or retracted; and the cause of these is impact with the palm of the hand or by falling onto stone, and their symptoms resemble each other.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which has already approached the nerve which is left in the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.</end_of_turn>
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And a fracture is that which is hidden in the bone, in the small groove of the bone, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called capillary.</end_of_turn
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And a fracture is caused by impact or by falling or by impact of stone, and its symptoms are that any layer of the bone enters the surrounding parts, and it is caused in the hollow part just as happens to the fingernails when they are impacted and some of them enter the surrounding parts.</end_of_turn
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most frequently it is caused in the bones of humous substances, just as in the heads of nails.</end_of_turn
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these mentioned fractures are traumatic, just as separated stars.</end_of_turn>
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come to regret all this.</end_of_turn
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these kinds of fractures by detection on those which are open and for inquiry of their extent and in order to determine whether there is corrupted bone over them.</end_of_turn
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is known because it is discovered on the bone, and it is excised, and the surrounding area is tented, so that the fracture appears black.</end_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Moreover, in the treatment of fracture, one must take into consideration at the outset the signs of illness, and when sometimes for the signs that signify importance appear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, fainting, fever, and sudden loss of consciousness and rigor of these symptoms, despite all this, if the patient does not recover.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And sometimes when non-progressive accidents appear, you hope for health, and when you begin the treatment of them.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of which is that if it is provoked at the beginning like that which is provoked in the days of spring, it covers that you study in the bone marrow up to the fourteenth day according to all the rules.</end_of_turn
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, it covers that you must rest the bone from the seventh day, having left the bone marrow exposed, so that the bone becomes corrupted from the nerve, and that these accidents that we have recommended take place.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the nerve covering the cerebellum, and is contracted and retracted, it covers that you should insert the contracted part and retract it, as I have recommended to you.</end_of_turn
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you take his head of the illness, and discover about the bone as is usually done and handle it as you are able according to the figure of the illness, and that you are curious about the illness.</end_of_turn
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you, you must oppose the detection of the bone, flux of ointment or cautery, and what covers it, and that you cover the place with soft cloths soaked in wine and oil, and make the wound rest until the swelling subsides; and be sure to drain the flux of ointment. And start from the circumference of the bone and from the incision.</end_of_turn
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to two methods of operation.</end_of_turn
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you insert the bone with a straight incision, and this is the form: And you administer another incision slightly wider than the first; and this is the form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And you administer more of the wider incision than the first.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is proper that you declare your name as an inscriber, for some of them are more lax than others; and some of them are more brief than the others and stand at the rear of their sharpness, and they are of iron or wicked.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use of them is facilitated in their percussion on the inscribers so that they do not bruise the head and injure them.</end_of_turn>
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, then cover that you perforate around it giving that you administer the inscribers at their travels, which are named superficial not profound.</end_of_turn>
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus except when those who do not stop the term of the bone until it is close to it so that at the superficial part or margin of that which is left is left the head of it appearing like a margin or a small circle, which hinders it from being submerged and passing through the toughness of the bone.</end_of_turn
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these superficial marks of which some may please the toughness of each bone, except in all tests of the cranium where the extremity is acute, the quantity in length and breadth is according to the quantity of toughness of this test.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of superficial marks: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the fractured bone is that you pause the mark on the bone and rotate it with the thumbs saying that the bone is already perforated; and then change the perforation to another place and stop when there is between all the quantity of the thickness of the ray or send it away.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And in addition to the inscription of the inscribers between each fracture of the bone, do that which is more subtle than to do over that in order to avoid lifting, as we have said, until you have eradicated the bone, or with your hand, or by any other cause for some tremors which appear over that, as for example, nails and fine forceps.</end_of_turn
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure that the inscriber does not touch any cause of the hernia.</end_of_turn>
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And therefore when you have perforated the bone and if it is continued with it, and if you take that out, be sure that you raise and expel that which is in the roughness of it from that which is in the bone like another inscriber, but indeed that it be more tender and subtle than the others.</end_of_turn
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small parts of the bones and fragments remain, then take that out easily with that which is due to you from the pangs; and indeed take care of the wound with liniment and ointment which we have mentioned.</end_of_turn
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another manner of operation is light, long, which says dissect Gualia and laze for great relief; and this is the word for it: it is necessary for you at the beginning to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is the most acute and obvious, until when you have discovered that part and you have stopped leaving that extremity of that inscriber slowly and joyfully of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the blunt part is round and does not touch any cause, and the acute part is of it in two directions forward and backward, as sometimes; that the blunt part be adjusted to the hernia with the face of the acute inscription on the bone.</end_of_turn
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And indeed pierce upon the inscriber with a little hammer so that you inscribe all the bone easily as it is rotated, and you will be sure of the accuracy that it does not happen by chance that the physician is the most fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.</end_of_turn
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there remains any attached cause to the bone in various places of the bone, inscribe that at the extremity of the inscriber that is blunt, and expel that which is at ease; that is delayed of it spontaneously and by fear.</end_of_turn
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate inside the hernia, and that which is broken or remains of the bone is the face of it, and remains in it roughness and subtle fragments, then be sure that you raise that roughness and expel those fragments with subtle reasons for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible for you to manage them in all places with the greatest convenience and the greatest safety of those according to which you have lost your operation that fractured bone and its figure.</end_of_turn
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And be sure that you manage in your reason the quantity of the bones at the beginning of those reasons, and indeed use almost all of the soft parts of it, and do not cease until you have finished administering the greatest and the most subtle of all those.</end_of_turn
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Indeed in any other small fractures capillaries and subtle fracture, be sure to manage carefully according to what you have lost to rectify it.</end_of_turn
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is because it is not known to anyone who has studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And so we have learned from the great fractures that...
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the swelling is rectangular when you radiate it from the bone, then take an amount of lint corresponding to the amount of the swelling, soak it in oil of ravens, and place it over the wound; and take another lint doubled or tripled and soak it in wine and oil of ravens and place it over the first one, and do so until the pus comes out readily from the wound without causing damage; and then apply on it some lint of lint and do not tighten it except as much as the swelling itself.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it like this for a day or two until you are sure that the wound has healed; and then remove it and administer medicines that are appropriate for such cases, such as flaxseed and oatmeal, and powdered gentian and aloe, and similar things to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you must sprinkle these medicines finely over the swelling; and generally, administer any medicine that has the property of stopping and not killing.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Observe with your wisdom that the swelling in your treatment should be neither too little nor too much; neither should you irritate it with oil or any other substance; and do not add any venom to it, for when it is applied to the bone it corrupts it and brings about the death of the patient, and brings about evil to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it is necessary to take into account in the fracture of the head, as it is more difficult to heal the bone and especially when the treatment is negligent, and is black on the surface; and therefore consider that if such an accident befalls the patient, it is dangerous in every way
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackening has occurred except from the medicine that is being used, and it is because of that medicine that this blackening has occurred, then take a little more of the medicine and three parts of oil of ravens and mix with these the mentioned balsam, and place it on the fracture; and do so until it is healed
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Observe that the nose is not fractured but rather that two larger portions have been separated from each other, or one of them is somewhat softened, so that there are two bones remaining, for the separated part is cartilaginous and is not fractured but is rather soft and flexible and susceptible to bruising
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If indeed one of the two parts is fractured, then you must insert a little bit into the nose at the site of the fracture, and stabilize that fracture by means of the tape called indicator and the cushion, until the nose returns to its natural shape
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do so easily, and keep in mind that you should not cause him any pain during this operation on the patient's pain
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the soft part of the nose, and you say that it is not necessary, then keep it equal to the width of the ray in which the thickness is small
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, do the same for it as for the other
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Close up the restoration of the nose on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, leave it for six days or until you have seen signs of healing
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the extremity of the nose a bandage of lint, if the fracture is in one part, or two cushions, if the fracture is in two parts, and the thickness of the cushion should be such that it fills the cavity of the nose
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Tell the old restorers that the cushions must be bound in border, and must be changed throughout the day, although you are not told to me; because it must be covered with an albumin of egg with powdered lead.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And there are some who say that instead of a cushion they will put honey into the nose, because it is more enveloping of the bone than the lint; and that when the nose is fractured the patient is not prohibited from inspiration
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do so, and if you wish, do not do so.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another remedy has happened post-caut, plaster the nose with cheese or with lead soaked in wine and oil of ravens, or with vinegar.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	Although it has not happened post-caut, nevertheless you must plaster the outside with barley flour and powdered gentian mixed with egg white; and put over it a layer of lead, and do not touch the nose for any reason whatsoever
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	May it be that if the bones of the nose are fractured in a slight or great degree, that you split over those [fractures], and extract those with instruments that are appropriate to those; and then close the wound, and care for that which has been rent in and consolidated, and with appropriate plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there be pus in the nose, then care for that which is scaly and administer lead canulas until it is completely healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter III.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of restoration of the mandible when it is fractured.</end_of_turn
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is fractured and the fracture is not accompanied by pus, it is necessary to determine if the fracture is displaced only, and not fractured in two and bent outwards. In this case, the knowledge of the fracture is slight.</end_of_turn
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth; and in the same way if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert the index finger of the right hand; and push with that the swelling of the fracture outwards, with your other hand on the outward part of the bone; thus you will equal that side.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible is already separated into two, then care must be taken to administer extension of two parts according to the rectitude until it is possible to equal them.</end_of_turn
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there be displacement of teeth with fracture, then strengthen those which you expect to remain with gold or silver or ivory; and place a cerate over the fractured mandible, and place over it a bandage of gut or silk, and a pad over the large hip bone adequately placed; and tie that which is displaced according to what is appropriate for the ligature of that and convenient for the application, until it is not destroyed.</end_of_turn
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the patient to rest and tranquility, and abstain from eating spicy foods.</end_of_turn
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you find that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you must cover yourself and remove that on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered in it and plaster that with powdered gypsum, glue of hog, or oatmeal, because you have left them without support, and place over the plaster bandage of linen.</end_of_turn
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And now when it is fixed and adjusted that plaster over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave that for a while, that is, do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for as many wounds as are left open will grow stiff in three months.</end_of_turn
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another wound occurs afterwards, care must be taken of that which has been said of open wounds until it is healed, and remove that aftercare.</end>
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by pus, consider if it is a broken bone or a swelling, because in this case you must order the removal of those swellings in order to remove those which cause discomfort.</end_of_turn>
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, care must be taken to widen it with the flebotome according to the quantity of your need.</end_of_turn
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those swellings, and of those you do not remove them, care must be taken to close the wound if it is wide; otherwise, place over that one of the plasters which is convenient and consolidate that.</end_of_turn
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of restoration of the thyroid when it is fractured.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A wound is called fractured when the thyroid is fractured from the front towards the back of the muscle, and that fracture is caused in three ways.</end_of_turn
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is fractured, or separated, or is separated into two parts without causing swellings; and it is difficult to restore it; or it is accompanied by swellings, and is difficult to restore it; or the fracture is accompanied by pus.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that is that two assistants are present, one to support and follow the fractured thyroid, and the other to extend the collar towards that part.</end_of_turn
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then wrap the fracture with the index fingers of both hands until the shape is restored according to what you consider, neither too taut nor too concave.</end_of_turn
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, care must be taken to suspend the patient's breath by holding his breath or by applying a bandage to his mouth; and the degree of this must be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the thyroid and cover the wound with your hand until you have secured the fracture as you consider appropriate.</end_of_turn
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If the wrist cannot be drawn out beyond the joints, so that it reaches the preon, then cover that the patient's head should be supine and rest a cushion on their muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The minister should support the limb beyond the joints until the wrist bone has been elevated to the preon, and then rectify the fracture and bind the parts together.</end_of_turn>
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel the wrist bones dislocated and swollen, cover that area and extract those fragments with ease.</end_of_turn>
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the fracture is retained in the bone, generate an incision of the limb with one of the instruments that you have provided, because you have left the wrist bone with the pain it had before; and this pain is of the kind of fist or iron from which this is the shape of it.</end_of_turn>
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is similar to a wound from which this is the cavity; and its width according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.</end_of_turn
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the incision should be as much as possible for the operation; there should be two limbs available as many times as possible, and one limb should be wide and the other narrow.</end_of_turn
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the membrane that you have incised when you extracted the fragment from the bone is wide, and you are sure of the hemostasis, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.</end_of_turn
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is slight, or if you fear hemostasis, then you should cover the wound with a dressing and powder according to the amount of the wound.</end_of_turn
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if bleeding occurs, apply pressure with wine vinegar and olive oil, and hold it over that area.</end_of_turn
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is fractured and the wound is closed, place a plaster cast made of wheat flour and egg white, and place it on the limb, stopping the tingling of the limb, if you have noticed it, and take nourishment, for the Saracens say that it should be long enough to reach the elbow and as wide as from thumb to wrist; and cover the wound with double powder. Take a splint of moderate size, which is three fingers wide and of a length similar to the limb. Wrap the splint around the limb and the cast on the part above the fracture; and take nourishment in the same way as before, and rotate the limb and the patient’s hand over the fracture, and reduce the fracture to its original position, and when the fracture is relaxed with the fracture, that is what is not hidden from you.</end_of_turn>
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	All this, however, that the splint should not rest on the fractured bone; and so that you can see the patient every day, because when the ligament is softened or the splint is already softened, then you should rectify this and strengthen the bandage.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And so keep the patient’s hand elevated over the limb, and let the tingling of the limb be covered with a small cushion at night; so that the adjutorium of the limb is elevated to the level of the wrist joint; or that the arm is bound to the limb at the wrist.</end_of_turn
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the ligament if bleeding does not occur in the place or if hemostasis is not achieved, within twelve days.</end_of_turn
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if you have seen the face of the limb at that time, renew the plaster and adjust the fracture, restore that and leave it until the fracture of the wrist joint is healed and has coagulated.</end_of_turn
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	It is strong and comfortable according to the month in xxviii days, and several visits in several homes is done in the space of that time.</end_of_turn
Capitol .vi.	End of Text.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Recovery from wrist fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scaphoid bone is fractured in the lateral part of the limb and is not fractured at the edges.</end_of_turn
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is fractured in the middle of the limb – and it is fractured in the middle of the limb – and is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture force you to prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every way that is possible for you to do.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And so keep over the powdered wheat flour and egg white with an egg; and cover the limb with a splint of moderate size.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If there is a depression in some parts of the spatula, then you should cover that depression with a soft stop, and equalize the splint.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And thus stretch out their arm with a long handle from the constriction downwards until it reaches the ankle bone without being impeded by the heel of the foot.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligaments in every limb; and when any is softened, stretch the other until it is equal to the ankle bone if it is impeded by the heel of the foot.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And I grasp the patient over the ankle bone like this
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And thus when this number is completed, then dissolve the ligament, and know that what has begun from the bones should not be feared or dissolved
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the ankle bone and put down the tendon, then split over them, and keep them apart, and do as has been said concerning the fracture of the scaphoid bone after excision of the callous.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot bone.</start_of_turn>
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The bones of the foot are fractured in the middle of the limb and thus it is necessary; but the extremities of the limb must not be moved until they are cicatrized and reduced.</start_of_turn
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And concerning the accidents of the limb when the middle is fractured, that it declines towards the heel and causes great pain, and difficulty in walking, and sneezing, and vomiting; and is declared in the cavity of the fractured bone and is not hidden from sensation.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of the limb is that you rest the patient over the two ankles, and put between the heel of the limb a cushion; and then press on the muscles of the limb, and adjust the ribs of the limb to the greatest extent of two ribs, and suspend yourself in the operation of the limb and in the equalization as much as is possible and convenient, until you return the shape of the bone as it was before.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And thus suspend over it the plaster and bandage and pause over the heel of the limb a soft cushion of gauze or leather and keep it like that; and close that in a loop; and suspend yourself over the fractured bone that it is not maimed; and move along the limb following the rounding of each bone, and stretch that which is strained downwards; and consider the ligament in every hour, and when it is softened stretch that one.</start_of_turn
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary you must provoke a swelling of that, you must correct the fracture or pain, or swelling that occurs in the limb; then you must withdraw and remove that and evacuate the plaster and rectify what has occurred in the manner of limb care; and then return the plaster, sometimes to the extent of the face; and adjust the fracture until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.</start_of_turn
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You must know that a fracture of the ribs does not crack through but in hollow places that follow two; and from the extremities of them from the upper part does not happen except for that which is cartilaginous.</start_of_turn
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you must take cognizance of them, you must not hide the inquiry from the sensation of them as it is said.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is that you bind the fracture as it is said according to the possibility, until it is bound as it is enough, and then plaster it and stretch the fractured bone with the ankle, if you wish.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the heel, then it causes the patient severe pain and puncture, as if it were a puncture that occurs to that which has pleuracy; and for that reason the bone is put under the membrane; and it causes difficulty in walking, and sneezing, and vomiting without relief; and this is of difficult care.</start_of_turn
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients have invented in that that which is not to be moved is to be held.</start_of_turn
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And thus they say: keep the patient still from eating and drinking that which brings about swelling and wind, so that the belly is not swollen and is extended, and the fracture is not impeded by the parts outside.</start_of_turn
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us beware of that so that it does not become the cause of causing callous. If it does not happen, we will help it to happen.</start_of_turn
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And I say to you of some of them that it is to be stopped from their excessive windiness; and that they should succeed with force; and indeed it is like reasoning, but indeed it is feared lest the wind should tear away the superfluous things from the limb for the fracture.</start_of_turn
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	He said to them: cover the area with a cloth that is already immersed in oil, and sprinkle powder between the ribs until it is full; let the ligature be tight when it embraces that according to its roundness; and then cure the patient with a plaster of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If it causes acute constriction of the patient who does not suffer from it, and if the bones are pierced with a pointed needle, remember about the patient, for when you cover the area, uncover the ribcage, and then take off that instrument which conserves the bag, recalling which is prior, and that it incites the bones easily, and extract it.</end_of_turn>
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And also let us adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, by stitching, and cure it with plaster until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it happens that pus comes out, then cover the area with powdered charcoal in oil and rest over the area, and let the patient be cured with what covers the pus.</end_of_turn
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And rest on the side on which you sleep, until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .ix.	End of Document.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Restoration of fracture of the spine and the pelvis.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some veins are seen to be fractured in the bones of the pelvis, and the physician must attend to them, and similarly to the vertebrae of the spine.</end_of_turn
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if he is healed or not, consider that sometimes the wounds are already softened and softened and softened and dead and you cannot move them or extend them or flex them without causing them pain, and when you squeeze them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel any pain, then you know that he is not healed, and in such a state it is mortal.</end_of_turn
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you touch them and feel that they are constricted with the fingers and pierced, then you know that the bone is saved and the patient will recover with care.</end_of_turn
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the spine like this and you want to know if he is healed or not, then consider the weight of his feet.</end_of_turn
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Sometimes when they are softened, accidents happen to those which are accustomed to it in the greatest, and when you sit on the two feet, you feel dizziness and vomiting, which is its will, and many veins are seen supine on the two feet and they cannot urinate, then you know that it is mortal, and do not work in his care.</end_of_turn
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	Maybe if no other cause is seen in them, the cause is better and lighter.</end_of_turn
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of them is that you pierce the cavity of the pus with a cautery needle which rests on the fractured vertebra, with oil or with cold poultices of vinegar; rest over that any vein that gives blood to the fractured vertebra until the pus is softened.</end_of_turn
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And let us pause one of the existing comfortable plasters and stretch over that which binds; and command the patient to rest and be quiet and not to sleep on the side where he feels pain until he is healed.</end_of_turn
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if an accident causes the fracture of the sacrum or any other cause which has already been separated from it, then cover that area and keep that bone still; and adjust the two lips of the wound, by stitching if it is large; and care for that which is inside the wound, until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Maybe if the heel of the bone is fractured, and it is the end of the limb, then cover that area with your left hand on the buttock, and grasp the fractured bone with your other hand as much as is possible for an equitable proportion; and then rest over that plaster and bandage, if necessary, and stretch that.</end_of_turn
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel the sacrum fractured in it, then keep that area still, and keep that, and care for the wound with the care that precedes until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .x.	End of Document.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de la ancha.	Restoration of limb.</end_of_turn
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the limb have fractured, and if they fracture, the fracture of them is nothing but communication in the extremities of those and are inscribed in the length and decline to the inward parts; and an accident happens to the patient pain in the area and puncture, and the limb is stupefacted when it is fractured.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over that which is over the fracture which is the figure of it.</end_of_turn
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only in the extremity, then embrace that part as much as is appropriate until it is reassembled to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is on the thigh or that it has already declined downwards, then make the patient sit on the edge of the bed until the fracture is restored
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And thus when it has been restored, place your hand over the plaster, and also over the heel or ankle, and hold firmly over the area where you do not fear puncture of the fracture or loosening of the staple.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Embrace the concavity with that which fills it, so that the swelling is equal, and command the patient to sleep on the two buttocks or recline on the side of the body
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If by chance the cautery should slip, cease the extension of the limb and the restoration of the limb until the burn of the cautery has subsided; and place your hand over the limb until it has healed; then return to the restoration of the limb, and hold firmly as before
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If there is injury to the heel bone or they are fractured, then treat them
Capitol .xi.	(End of document
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Note: The document ends abruptly and does not contain the complete translation of the treatise.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Note: "Adjutori" refers to the hip bone or pelvic bone
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, the restoration of the limb is in two ways, of which one is to grasp the thigh with a broad hand like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And with two ligaments put in two extremities, and hold it elevated
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Keep the patient sitting on a chair; and take out the fractured limb from the thigh until it reaches the middle of the thigh where the curvature of the thigh is attached
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And hold over any significant cause or discomfort, or extend it downwards; and the doctor should put something that holds the fracture firmly in place, until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient lies on his side and the hand of the limb is suspended at the collarbone; and command two assistants to hold one hand above the fracture with their thumbs down; and the other to hold the foot of the limb; and whichever of them extends to the side
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you wish the extension to be stronger, then hold firmly over the fracture with one ligament and over the other, and whichever of the assistants extends both his hands.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, cover that half of the ligament over the trochanters and the other half the fracture must be over the thighbone.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly if the fracture is close to the hip, cover that part of the ligament over that place and over the hipbone
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Embrace that which facilitates and helps, and when it is restored as it should be, hold firmly what is not at risk of burn from the cautery
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If there is a burn from the cautery, leave the dressing in place for seven days, and place over it a dry bandage soaked in oil and vinegar until the burn has healed, and then hold firmly once more
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to hold the limb is to place the plaster over the fracture, and then cover it with a layer of lint; and adjust the arm over that hip bone, and place your open hand over the thigh muscle
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And hold the limb still and support the hip bone so that the limb is in place without hindering the healing of the fracture
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use crutches
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And put on that staple which is stronger and more rigid than the others; and place between each staple the width of a finger, and the length of the staples according to the fracture in addition to three fingers from the whole side
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And hold firmly over the staples with the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your dressing on the area of the fracture is more straight
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has healed, make the dressing smaller
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus when sometimes the position of the staples and the dressing is as we have said when restoring the limb to its normal position, then do so
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an embolism from the cautery, then leave the stricture and stars until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed or swollen; or that food is prohibited from reaching the limb due to the stricture; therefore rectify all this as we have said.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Even if you are confident that no cause of this will arise, do not remove the ligature until three days have passed.</end_of_turn>
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Let the patient rest on the side of the sick person, and the hands and feet on the stomach.</end_of_turn
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Let the attendants eat a full meal of marrow, and consider at every hour of the night or day that it is not swollen or dissolved the figure of the fractured limb, or that the ligament is softened, therefore rectify all this with your skill.</end_of_turn
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Let the patient abstain from food according to the order that we have given before, until the food is moderately digestible when consumed; and when it is consumed, cover that it is not vomited.</end_of_turn
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the attendants and the chamber of the patient, they should be strong for forty days; and it should be covered that they are discharged and that baths are administered, and that medicines are given, which will rectify this.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is treated early, then do not remove the ligature from that limb until the seventh day or two months.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xii.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Restoration of the fracture of the arm.</end_of_turn
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two knuckles; of which one is small, which is that which is called the thumb, and the other is great and is that which is grasped from beyond the thumb, from the part beyond the index finger.</end_of_turn
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if only the great knuckle is fractured, or only the small one, or both are fractured together.</end_of_turn
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small knuckle is fractured, then the restoration of it is light, and the healing is lighter.</end_of_turn
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the great knuckle is fractured from the side, the fracture is bad, and the healing is difficult.</end_of_turn
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worse of all is when both bones are fractured together.</end_of_turn
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the fractured bone is the small one above, it is convenient for the doctor to delay the restoration, which allows for little extension until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if the great knuckle is fractured, it is necessary to pause the extension more urgently.</end_of_turn
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured together, it is necessary to pause the extrusion much more strongly.</end_of_turn
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must keep the figure of the hand still during the restoration of it and the extension of it supported over a cushion, and that the thumb be lower than the other fingers, and the hand be placed on a cushion.</end_of_turn
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion under the patient's arm or around the limb, so that the patient does not suffer work.</end>
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let the attendants extend the arm from the part beyond the elbow towards the shoulder or towards the ligament, and another attendant extend them similarly.</end_of_turn
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And let the doctor unite the bone until it is reduced according to the best figure that can be obtained.</end_of_turn>
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is swelling of the bone, let him perforate to reduce all the swelling in the limb with your skill.</end_of_turn
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears separated swelling that you do not hope will heal in the restoration of the limb, then you should leave it as it is according to the manner in which we have said.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	And if the fracture is on a bruise, and I have already said enough about this matter, take care of it.</end_of_turn
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an embolism from the cautery occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line a cloth with coarse fat and white wax, and mix some between specks of soot and smoothness, and strengthen the bandage over that which is over the stricture until the embolism is gone; and you must remove the cloth and pause the plaster prepared from powdered millet with clay and water, and put on a cushion, and keep the limb still for a longer and stronger star.</end_of_turn
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And so keep the compression on the area of the fracture firm and strong, and when more is required, extend the compression to the parts above or below the fracture, keep the compression a little less soft than before in proportion as the memory of the fracture is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And let the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture be soft and damp, not hard or rough, and the thread which is used to tie them should be neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have recommended
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and the ligament nearby for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs which requires rectification, do so as prudence dictates for the limb, and while you are doing so, cover that you may bathe the limb with cold water until the cause of the bruise has ceased
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Keep the limb still until the pain has subsided, and then remove the compression
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the swelling has already subsided and the bone has already been rearranged, and if it appears to be at rest, then rectify everything with your skill
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider also if the nourishment is forbidden to reach the limb due to excessive compression, for in this case keep the limb slightly relaxed and allow some time for it to recover before nourishing it again, and strengthen that
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If there is no further cause for these things which we have mentioned, then do not remove the dressing for about xx days or so
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And so suspend the patient's hand for his movement, and let him sleep on the bed two.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is usually restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or more likely in xxviii days, according to the condition of the complexions and the skill of the physician
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and the fingers.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that at the thumb of the hand and the joints of the fingers there is a fracture, and that it does not happen to them except for soft swellings.</end_of_turn
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or bruised, the patient should continue to fall and lean on it as before, and place his hand over that which is extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And so the minister extends the broken bones and the physician joins them together until they are well united again
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And so keep the plaster and bandage still, except in the case of an abscess; and keep the bone covered according to the amount of the area, and you have already covered that with a bandage.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the area of the palm you must hold the palm of the hand against the chest, and order the patient to strengthen that which is his fractured thumb; strengthen that with the palm long.</end_of_turn
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the limb be supported on a cushion so that the limb is applied to the palm; and strengthen that as much as it covers.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the edges, keep the thumb and the other bone of the palm relaxed, so that the hand is open and closed; and keep the compression still, even if the hand is rotated between the fingers and their ligaments.</end_of_turn
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If there is a fracture in some of the joints of the fingers, if it is said to be loose, let it be united as it is convenient and strengthen that with the palm of the hand; and if you wish, keep the small joint of the thumb raised so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, just as in the middle part or in the index, or in the ring or in the little finger, keep it united and bound with the finger to which it is adjacent; or bind them all together as a whole, which is better; or keep the small bone still as we have said before.</end_of_turn
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your restoration, and so do those who are experienced in surgery, what is said concerning the abscess and oppose it — with the surgical procedure — with what covers when any cause of these things occurs, as is repeated in the narration.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is fractured and is recognized according to the feeling that it is converted to the neighboring part and the surrounding pus
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done so that the ligament is stretched over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient is placed prone on the abdomen and on the face
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then extend all the ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Even if it is close to the hip, then the ligament is properly placed at the heel towards the fifth part, so that the extension is made there, and the other ligament leaves the fracture
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is close to the heel, then make the proper ligament at the heel and the extension to the other parts
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor should bite the bone on both sides more than enough to reduce that according to the natural shape and the bone is united by a good junction; the hand should be kept still and plastered, if necessary, until healing has taken place.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If necessary, leave it for five days until the swelling has subsided, and then return to your care
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be so tight: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and bend it two or three times, and remove the excess; and then cover the limb until it reaches the hip and the heel of the thigh
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And inside put a long thread between the thigh and the limb towards the heel, and pass the ends of the thread from the part furthest from the wound towards the two parts of the wound, and then roll over the limb and the thigh as much as the bandage allows
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And keep the thigh still in the place of the fracture and put a splint on the limb of the wound
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the spaces between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the swelling is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And start to tighten the bandage firmly from the middle of the fracture with three or four layers, and when you have finished tightening the ligament at the site of the fracture, the bandage should be less tight and lighter and softer
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend the two ends of the thread to the lower parts until it reaches the heel of the foot, and tighten both ends of the laces of the other part so that the ligament is not pulled from the root
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And leave the bandage on for a while, so that it does not cause stiffness or swelling or pain; and if any of these things happen, take it off and correct what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said above
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is very painful, then bite it as much as possible; if not, remove it and leave only that which is necessary, and care for the cause of the pain until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Every wound is strengthened in this fracture of the thigh as much as the laces are adjusted to the laces, as we have said in the instructions and in the arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Therefore, when restoring it in this way, it must not cause the patient to become limping; and if only one limb is restored, that of the other must also be applied, because it is necessary that both should be limping at the same time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you must know that the thigh is strengthened in seventy days or a few months or a few weeks, according to the diversity of complications and the other resources.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shin bone.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You must know that the fracture of the shin bone is usually caused by excessive tension of the surrounding tissues.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture does happen, it is only a crack or break in its parts, and this is accompanied by swelling or pain, and over this rests the feeling.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration is done so that it is bound up again as much as is broken in its parts until it is united and joined as much as possible for the sake of equality and facility and manufacturing.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And keep still the plaster and put on a round splint, if you think it is necessary; and tighten the bandage as much as is convenient.</end_of_turn
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Considering all the precautions recommended in other fractures, such as the cautery aftercare and resembling those which are opposed to any mishap that may arise until the patient is completely healed.
Capitol .xvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</start_of_turn
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</start_of_turn
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	Considering all the precautions recommended in other fractures, such as the cautery aftercare and resembling those which are opposed to any mishap that may arise until the patient is completely healed.</start_of_turn
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	When both bones are fractured together, the limb is converted into pieces.</start_of_turn
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	When the small bone is fractured, the limb is converted into fragments.</start_of_turn
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	When the large bone is fractured, the limb is deformed, and this is the cause of your doubts.</start_of_turn
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the fragments according to the healing process.</start_of_turn
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the limb is slight and without soft tissue damage, that the extension should be milder and lighter, and relieve with your skill.</start_of_turn
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the limb there is any cause of operation on the bone, and that is when you have healed the fragments and when you have completed the whole operation, then you will take pieces of sponge of the foot which is paused from below the causes which are paused alone, and so you must do without causing damage to the hands, and make the length of those according to the length of the limb and the degree of bending inwards.</start_of_turn
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And cover with two coverings each bandage according to its length, and suspend one over the part of the limb from one side and the other from the other side, and be from the nail inwards of the foot.</start_of_turn
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And tie the two fragments in three places at the two extremities and in the middle part, so that the limb is prohibited from leaning to the right and left, and is in a good position.</start_of_turn
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And an elastic bandage has already been administered according to the length of the limb; and keep the limb fixed in it so that it conserves its movement.</start_of_turn
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly cover more than when there is a fracture, and when that is properly done.</start_of_turn
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Consider in every day the limb and study it in order to understand it better, and you will protect it from aftercare and from inflammation or other causes resembling that; and when any of those causes occurs, then you must stop it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	End of the treatise.</start_of_turn
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.</start_of_turn
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not usually fracture; however, the bones of the foot sometimes fracture; and the toes rarely fracture, and it does not happen to them except in cases of great violence.</start_of_turn
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot must fracture and sometimes those bones must be elevated between them, then you must place the foot on the prepared ground like when going out.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And suspend one foot over that which is elevated of those bones, and support them, and press, and heal those until they are restored in their places.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And suspend plaster and stop discharge, and keep the belly of the foot a little wider than a small loaf of bread with two plaster caps.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that which is stretched out that has been straightened, because you have covered it with cloths and other causes that indicate.</start_of_turn
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will remove the ligament, because you will find the bones healed, or fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those is as dangerous as with the needle.</start_of_turn
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	However if any of those bones are fractured, then restore those, and keep those as I have said and recommend concerning the restoration of the fingers of the hand.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then pause for a moment, according to the length of the finger, and put a little pressure on it; and then let the patient rest on this table which is recommended to you, and strengthen that restriction downwards.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May be if these bones are fractured two or three or more, then you pause on each finger until you have grasped the amount of their circumference covered in soft leather, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the feet of the table to keep the belly of the foot well retained.</end_of_turn>
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you to remember that you must not neglect other causes which we have mentioned in other fractures of the accidents which we have mentioned; and be attentive to every mishap in which you suspect a fracture.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</end_turn>
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the bone of the thigh and of the fibula and of the heel bone.</end_turn
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the bone of the thigh is fractured, then cease that movement in the groin, and incline that towards the side of two, a little, and keep it from behind.</end_turn
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And put the mattress under the hip, and make a point in the hip as much as you hope; and elevate the two little bones gradually, until everything that is outside is forgotten until the fractured part returns to its place as much as you hope and the fractured bone returns.</end_turn
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And pause the powder over the two of them, and when you wish to urinate, remain in the groin easily and approach; and reduce and return that as you commanded at the beginning, and approach returning the powder first.</end_turn
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or until it is restored.</end_turn
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take once of vinegar and strengthen over the ankle a tube of glass; and put the whole bladder into the hip, and approach sprinkle in the tube with force until the bladder is inflated within the hip, because the fracture returns.</end_turn
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And approach both with hip and stay for five days as we have recommended, until it is healed.</end_turn
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the fibula of the foot or of the thigh is fractured, then administer in the restoration and agility of them what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.</end_turn
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is hidden in these principal fractures is not hidden in these fractures; and little do they know those who study and use this book well; for that fracture means to you in the greatest possibilities of physical restoration and in the strengthening of them, and therefore understand well.</end_turn
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But when the heel bone is fractured, take gauze of wool, and put the heel bone in that; and pause over the covering of the cloth, and be covered, and approach leave it for three days or until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_turn
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of fracture of the bones when it is soft.</end_turn
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient in that in which the fracture occurs with soft swelling, and more especially if the bone is great as for example the bone of the thigh or the ankle bone, or something similar, that you take care of these things and flebotomize them as much as possible if the conditions of flebulation allow you or if the testifiers tell you so as we have said.</end_turn
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling subsides healed, then cover that you keep the retention of them in that way in which you powdered over them before it was shattered, if for another cause it does not exist.</end_turn
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And approach commence to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong that, if not after that.</end_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if after that there is apostemal discharge, then leave the restoration of them until the apostemal discharge has ceased, and do not approach them for three days and three nights in total, for you will cause other accidents.</end_turn
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the fractured bone is prominent over the edge of the wound, then cover that you perforate to reduce that and to equalize that as much as the greatest ease and with little extension.</end_turn
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not to your liking and the equality of them with the thighs is not to your liking, then you reduce that as much as your greatest ease; and that is a wound that is made of iron, the length of which is of seven or eight and the width is according to the quantity of the swelling; and for that it is necessary for the doctor to anticipate those three or four according to the quantity that you indicate in the care of all sorts of fractures.</end_turn
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Be gentle, and take little hold of the limb for fear of breaking it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Be cautious of the limb to which the mark is made in the groin; grasp it loosely so that you do not damage the surrounding area.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how you do it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so be gentle
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it must be held elevated above the limb bone that is prominent
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And pull out the limb until the bone returns, and keep it equalised with any bandage
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore force the limb to be equal between the fractures, and if the fractured limb is slight and you do not perceive any discomfort, then you must insert the limb back into the bone so that the instrument has power over it
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you are unable to reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then you must cover it with what covers the incision of the physicians who have advised you; or saw off that part with one of the saws in whatever way you can
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And remove that which remains in the bone of roughness and small sores.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced and the patient feels great pain, know that the bone has not been returned to its natural place; and then do what you can to comfort the patient greatly
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When the bone has been restored as you have done, and when you have submerged the limb in black vinegar, and properly if it is summer, and do not put anything greasy or oily on the wound, so that it does not cause swelling and corruption
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And immediately administer cold compresses at the time of the meal to complement the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered until you have sutured it with needles and used bandages according to the quantity of the wound
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Beware that you do not pull the wound at the fracture, because it may cause the physicians to lose faith in the treatment, and it will cause great pain to the patient, either death or serious illness, so be careful
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the limb is stiff, soft, different from the stiffness of other fractures
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or bad, and you fear concerning that limb the accidents that we have recommended, and you feel pain in the area, know that you should not put on the stitches, but rather put on a dressing of coarse cloth instead of needles and strengthen it with those
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when a few days have passed since the wound began, if it has become engorged, know that the limb has regained its natural position, and immediately administer calamine, which is what we usually do for wounds, along with tetracycline and similar medications.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Remember that you must remove the dressing and consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and stopped, and that the limb is prepared in such a way that the swelling will recede from the parts below with ease
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days have passed since the wound appeared, and it is neither consolidated nor has it been excised from the limb, know that here is an obstruction of the small ones so that you must examine the wound again with more attention
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those obstructions those that are separated remain and are extracted, those that are not separated remain and cause the limb to swell and cause pain, pierce through to insert them as you can.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If gangrene or blackening occurs in the wound, it is a sign of festering or other kind of corruption and putrefaction, know that you must immediately seek advice from the chief physician regarding the treatment which is preceded by narration in the capital city
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And when you are in doubt as to what should be done and your appearance is poor: when the limb is bruised, pay attention to the limb as if it were the bone of the thigh or the knee, and like those of the great limbs, and do not presume any attraction of it, or the extraction of it which may cause death; have the limb left in peace until it has healed naturally, for it is likely that it will fall away by itself within approximately twenty or thirty days And if you take care of the wound as I have said, and if you do not leave it, it will heal by itself
Capitol .xx.	Capital city.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of the wound which occurs in the aftermath of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The swelling that has occurred in this fracture is particularly violent in the area of the joints and is often seen in this condition. It hinders the natural function of the limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Consider whether the swelling is recent and administer astringent medicines that have been shown to be useful in this condition, and see, and let the patient lie down, and ask about any nausea or vomiting, and look at the color of the urine; in this way you can take some of these medicines or all of them, and confirm that they are effective in stopping the bleeding, or amalgams of blood, or other hemorrhages, and place the hand over the swelling to prevent further bleeding.</end_of_turn>
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Keep the limb still for several days; then remove it and repeat the process until the swelling subsides; or stretch over that lamina of membrane that hangs down, because it has the property of holding up everything that is swollen in the limb.</end_of_turn>
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Even if the swelling has already hardened and stretched, and it is necessary to drain it, do so cautiously, and take out the thickest parts first, and then remove the excess; or prick it with a needle so that the pus escapes, and keep it closed until it is healed; and take care of it until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxi.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Restoration of the fracture when it is restored and then keep the limb still and flexible not according to its natural habit.</end_of_turn>
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has been restored, and then the limb is still and flexible, it is not useful for anything except for certain causes: of which one is the multitude of solutions of ligaments and that their tension is not sufficient; or for excessive tension of the ligaments so that the nourishment of the limb is prohibited; or for a multitude of unnecessary emboli; or for excessive movement that is not in its time; or for weakness in the body of the patient and for his debility.</end_of_turn
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Care for this is to feed the patient and make him comfortable until his health is multiplied in him; administer baths; and give him wine and let him know about it.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And keep the limb still so that the wound does not prevent the limb from receiving nourishment, or continues to bleed excessively until the nourishment returns to its natural state.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxii.	End of treatise.</end_of_turn
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Care for fractured bones when they are restored gently and prevent them from being operated on again by anything that covers them.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an injury occurs to a limb that has already been restored, keep the healing process of the fracture slow and gentle to avoid further injury to the fractured bone and swelling, and is for this reason that faith is placed in the limb, even though the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, however it does not cover that you must disobey the advice of the one who is responsible for the limb that it is to be treated for a new fracture.</end_of_turn
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	It is already known among doctors and restorers who have made use of us in this matter; and this operation is not to be repeated without great fear of the signal that is mortal.</end_of_turn
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If swelling and nodulation are recent, it is necessary to drain them with lukewarm water in which there are many soothing herbs, such as chamomile, fennel, meadowsweet, and similar; or make an application of plaster with plaster of Paris or olive oil, and apply it; or take figs that are bruised with pomegranate seeds and dissolve them with honey or oil of chamomile.</end_of_turn
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	All these remedies are dissolved with constant gentle rubbing that is both in the hottest and coldest seasons, and is administered in every hour of the day.</end_of_turn
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the swelling has already hardened and is strong, and is converted into a stone, and is caused, it is necessary to care for it with fire, for the pus must be evacuated and the continuation of the bone must be dissolved, and it is to be understood that excess of swelling of the middle of the bone with the bone that is underneath is to be evacuated with ease and with study.</end>
Capitol .xxiii.	End of Book.</end_of_turn
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the matter of dislocation.</end_of_turn>
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the sudden displacement of any joint of the limb, which is prohibited from movement, and which causes pain and great lesions in the body.</end_of_turn
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an accident occurs with dislocation, it is necessary to perform it as soon as possible so that it can be reduced, and do not delay, for if it is delayed, the limb is swollen and strong, and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.</end_of_turn
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And let me remind you that during the apostate hour, neither must the patient be made to vomit nor stretch, for these things cause spasms and pains that are harmful.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, the doctor must cover the patient's face with a wet cloth, and immediately administer cold water and oil; and gently reduce the pressure
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all parts must be treated with the water from which the memory will arise in their location
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And thus I have ordered the heads of dislocation according to the order of fracture; from the upper part of the body inwards to the lower part of the body outwards.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jawbone downwards
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated are both mandibles if they are not taken hold of; and the dislocation of both is useful in two ways: that either they are slightly displaced from their places for little movement, or that they are completely dislocated and united, until they are softened at the junction where saliva from the patient escapes and which does not permit them to open their mouth or close their lips, and their tongue is wrapped in their word
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, the patient returns to their major position by themselves without any cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and united, the doctor must immediately administer reduction of it, and must not delay in doing so
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor puts their thumb of their right hand at the root of the dislocation of the mandible inwards of the mouth, if the dislocation is of one side; or that they put their two thumbs together, if the dislocation is of two sides, and the others say from the rest of them to hold; and the doctor commands the patient to stop their mandibles and remove anything from their jaws; and the doctor should touch the mandible and bandage the mandible until it returns to its place
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are simultaneously dislocated, the doctor should administer evaporation with cold water and oil, until the reduction of both is achieved and not delayed in both, as we have said
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are softened, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, the doctor should suspend over those little particles of matter around the root, and apply wax and oil; and gently bind them with ligatures
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their two sides, with the head between two cushions, so that neither side is injured; and do not force them to swallow anything further; have the patient's tongue tied, until when the pains have subsided and the mandibles are not dislocated, the doctor may give them something to drink again
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let the drink be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the patient's mouth because of food and drink and conversation, until the mandible is healed and recovered
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and is not converted to its proper place, the doctor must give the patient feverish sweats and vinegar drinks, and they are very likely to become agitated and vomit violently
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you have done this many times, the doctor will learn that it is a loss; and most of those to whom this has happened die within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not displaced from the back because of its continuity with the ribs; and some say that it is displaced outwards, and this is known from the feeling
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of it is that the patient sits on their two sides and extends their arms outwards
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And gently compress the area with your palm with strong compression, so that it returns
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And suspend over that plaster and particles and strengthen that
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	And the extremity of that which was previously supported by the collarbone is not dislocated in any day; the doctor must reduce it and soften it as we have said and as you are accustomed to doing with your instruments
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And suspend over that plaster, particles, and traction, and command the patient to remain calm and at rest until it is healed
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
Capitol .xxvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</end_of_turn>
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	When the limb is elevated, and when the limb is over-bent.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And thus this remedy is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from the socket.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated without any visible cause or due to some other reason, it is necessary to administer cautery three times, as it is said in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this is done and seven days have passed, and the ligament is not loosened and the joint is not stabilized, and the swelling and tension are reduced without any visible cause, and the limb is not elevated, it is known that the nerves of the limb are either numb or stretched or swollen, and that the limb is paralyzed forever
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	As for the dislocation of that which is useful to the feet and the knee or the buttocks, reduction is useful with an impulse and extension at the most, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let it be administered in the other place where there is tension, and care for that until it is healed
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens that the healing takes place slowly in the limb and there is delay in its movement, it is necessary to support the limb greatly until that gravity is relieved and returns to its natural state
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVVII.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the knee joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and that which is dislocated in all parts, especially in the part which is facing the part behind, and the dislocation of the limb is not recognized until it is displaced from its place; when you adjust the knee which is displaced, immediately you will know that the joint is depressed and cannot bend the limb, nor touch anything below the muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you must tighten the knee, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible before applying cautery; for if you apply the cautery without reducing the dislocation, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not good for healing; and especially when it is at the back of the limb, for it is worse of all other kinds of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many veins are swollen on that side.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the limb, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the limb is extended with two thumbs, and the limb is expanded, and the hands of the physician are placed on the knee and leave it there, and the practitioner covers the joint with his thumbs, or with the base of his palm until it returns to its place
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And even if the dislocation is at the front, it returns as soon as you bend your finger with your hand, until you perforate the knee with the base of your palm
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, the physician must administer violent extension and great force
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants extend the limb, and hold this support of two assistants so that it does not slip from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And let the limb be rotated throughout its extent, because it is wrapped around the thumb, or ligament
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, put some oil there so that these things which help to lubricate the joint facilitate; and then press the joint with force until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And when the reduction is made, cover it with that plaster in which is stipticity and exudation with a mixture of flour and water, and extend it with stricture descending, and suspend the limb from the column, and leave it like that for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And so if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you will loosen the ligament of the limb and leave it like that.</end_of_turn>
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if the joint is not healed, the physician will repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave it like that for several days until it is extruded; and then loosen that.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if it happens that gravity suddenly affects the reduction of the joint, and the limb is in movement, the physician must administer moisture in the limb and external friction, and pressure, until it is relieved; or rest over the joint without any greasy motion; and tie it up, and leave it like that during the day and night
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And so on, put it in water; and when the swelling subsides, the physician will cool the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat over that which was said, which is gentle rocking, a little bit of stretching, and the second, and the third time, etc.</end_of_turn
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The corruption has already spread throughout the bowels within the bath, until it is delimited.</end_of_turn
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	Or if you wish, rest over that wound of the moist cow and cover it with a border and bandage; and make some veins, because that is moist and reduces the swelling.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol XXVIII
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Treatment for dislocation of the bones, that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The bone of the hand is dislocated many times, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, while the opposite is with the other joints, more so because speed is necessary in the reduction in the hour in which it is dislocated, so that the limb does not suffer from post-traumatic stiffness or that there occurs in it post-traumatic injury.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the wrist of the patient on a board and extend the hand of him, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the imminent part of the joint, and massages that until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered if the palm is already bowed towards the belly of the hand, for in that case the patient must hold two of his hands over a board during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is antecedent, you must hold two of his hands, for in that case the position of his hand that is inside intrinsically over the board so that the hand of the doctor rests on that imminent part of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore, if it returns well, it is good; and if not, when you have strained it as much as you can without causing further displacement, leave it; and do not attempt it again until the pain has disappeared from it.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint remains according to its stiffness; and do not notice to the patient any cause, but that the hand is softened and cannot be strained without causing any cause; for the nerves are often torn or stretched, and it is not caused by it except for the stretching of the cautery at the time of treatment.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the limb is returned, leave it resting on the bandage that we have recommended, and leave it strapped for five days; and then let it be loosened and left, and exercise the hand of him.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the limb is delayed and happens in it any gravity, leave cold water on that and some greasy ointment, until the swelling is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXVIII
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Treatment for dislocation of the bones.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some bones of the hand are dislocated throughout the body.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the two of the palm or at the belly of the hand, the doctor must hold the finger and impel the dislocation towards the toes until it returns to its place
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And support the head of the finger, and suspend that beyond the part that is dislocated, and leave that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend that until it is equal in that place again
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when that will not be, lie that according to that narration, and do not cease loosening that in the day and exercising, and lie that at night; and do this for several days until it is healed
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with that, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and leave that at that part and do that with the first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same with that when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXIX
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Treatment for dislocation of the vertebrae of the back
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident occurs to some of the vertebrae of the back or the pelvis, and some vertebrae of those bones remain locked in place, in that case there is no treatment, for death covers the patient
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of that is that the evacuation of the patient is outside of their will, and cannot be retained; and some bones of the hand are softened in some members of them or two limbs or two arms of them, or one of them; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, which is neither softened nor can it be reduced to its place without causing the evacuation of those to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that is already dislocated behind and is called gelliosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However, the treatment of that is that the doctor considers if the gelliosis occurred in infancy, for in that case it is neither a treatment nor a healing of everything
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in those cases where it is seen in the case or by percussion or by appearance, I will say that the ancients spoke of long methods of treatment, of which the most return with profit; however, I have already mentioned that I will abbreviate that which is little useful from the abundance of that, for my proximity to the understanding of my exposition, to which I have exposed and explained it with various instruments that I have shown and explained with various instruments that I have used.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in cases where swelling occurs from the front of the foot up to the toes, it is neither an omen nor a healing of that; and in the same way in that which it is caused by two faults.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And these are not cured except for those which happen directly in the two places where I recommend it.</start_of_turn>
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the disease should be spread over its face over towards the edge of the heel, and that it should be spread downwards so that it does not touch the toes.</start_of_turn
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And immediately put two supports under the foot, one fixed to the ground at the heel end and the other under the toes in the opposite heel end.</start_of_turn
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister has the support, and it is not fixed in a fossa; and another minister has the other according to that manner.</start_of_turn
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And immediately cover the head of the disease and leave only the toenails uncovered; and extend the limb of the ligament to the support which is above the head of the foot, and tie that one in it; and immediately strengthen the other ligament over the ankles of the limb with which they are joined, and over the chest; and adjust all the ligaments and tie those in the other support which is above the toes.</start_of_turn
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And immediately the minister grasps and extends the ligament towards the part of the support, and do not leave the two supports and the ligaments of the thighs in those places where they are fixed, even though they are not fastened in this way.</start_of_turn
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine and strengthens within it until it returns, or that he places over that a table, and immediately adjust under the table the thighs of the patient until they return.</start_of_turn
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, the hour takes a table whose width or length is three palms, and grasp on the wall of which we have said that it is near the disease a place where the end of the table is.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And immediately stop the large part of the table on the spine, and the doctor places the thighs on the other end, and push until the spine is contracted and returns to its place.</start_of_turn
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, or turn around with the hand; and that you stay on the ground with the head of the disease at the heel of the foot two palms, and that the head of the foot be at the heel of the foot immediately two palms; and that the length which is between each support be a palm, and that is enough in every support which has been made until it returns, and that no part should be fixed on the ground so that it should not be crushed.</start_of_turn
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there is one support round in which the return is made, and it is rotated in the two joints of the two supports.</start_of_turn
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it there is a joint in which the support is formed, the length of which is a palm from the point where it is rotated; and in the other two supports it is like that.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And immediately strengthen the ligaments which you have stretched in the feet of the disease in the part which is above the head of the foot, and the ligaments which you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the part which is above the toes.</start_of_turn
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And immediately order that every return should be held by a minister who grasps the return with his hand, and the doctor should grasp the spine as we have said.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the return:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And immediately when the spine returns, and the limb is relaxed, the hour covers that it pauses immediately with a bandage of wool, and stops; and immediately place over the bandage the table whose width is three fingers or more, and the length of which is equal to the extent of the swelling, and over the part of the spine.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And immediately bind with the ligament which we have said, and use the disease for mild nourishment until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any remaining danger remains in the limb at the end of the healing, the hour covers that anti-inflammatory medicines should be administered that soften and soothe with the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and they are already administered in that limb in a lead plate.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And every tremor that happens behind the spines of the two is cured by that dislocation; and that is the bone which has already mentioned that it does not cover that there is any other cause of death with this medicine, because it will make you act foolishly.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Capital .xxxi.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Say that the ankle joint and the joint of the muscle do not deviate only by dislocation alone, but also by those that happen to the other joints of the foot, removing and concaving them
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, that is, to the inside, or to the outside, or to the front, or to the back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Most often it is dislocated inwards, and little to the front or to the back
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that when you adjust the limb of the sick person to the limb of the healthy person, the heel of the sick person is more prominent than that of the healthy person, and the sick person cannot bend their foot without causing them pain, and that is where the tip of the cushion has already passed.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that it happens on the outside of the ankle in the opposite way to this accident
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that the limb is extended towards the front, however, it does not bend where it hurts, and if you force it to bend there, you will not be able to walk on the front of the foot; the urine is retained and the swelling is posttraumatic, and you must walk on the ankle bone
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that neither the heel nor the toe can be bent, and the limb is shorter than the other limb, and the swelling is softened, and the cushion has passed over that place
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The greatest reduction of this kind of dislocation is that you must consider, when, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it is already outdated from when you should have administered a reduction to it and it remains according to its situation; in this case it is not in this treatment that you must look for benefit; for in this case there is no benefit in doing so
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	More in the one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you must take care that you return the joint to its place and extend it outwards, and upwards and downwards, for strong pain will return if you do not do so and it will not be cured by any other treatment
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	More, if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare to minister strong and extend the limb of the side that you left behind, or at the least its most, or bind what is bound over the limb below the ankle; and another minister extend your hand of that side outwards so that your thumbs touch the tip of your toes; and strengthen the bandage around the ankle and keep another minister on the other extremity of the limb.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension of the limb or of the outer part to the ankle or from the back to the heel, or from the front to the ankle bone.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And the extension of all of them together until the sick person’s limb is elevated above the ground and remains hanging down
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four of them
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	Therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; but if not, it is necessary in every kind of treatment that we speak of in this treatise.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of it, when it is dislocated, if the dislocation is inward, cover that the sick person is resting on their buttocks; and place the ligaments over the ankle in that place where the tip of the cushion passes over between the ankle and the heel; and extend the ligament from the part of the ankle towards the higher part of the ankle bone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister strongly grasps the toes, and immediately grasp the large part of the ankle of the sick person and extend outwards for a violent extension, so that the pain returns to its place
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This kind of treatment is of less severe treatment than the others for this member.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	More, if you are excused for it and do not obey the order in this kind of treatment, it is necessary that you bind both feet of the sick person together with a strong and tight bandage, over both ankles and both toes
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be equal to the quantity of four fingers, and let the bandage of the sick person be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the sick person be suspended above the head of the foot, and that it be in the middle; and let the length of the limb from the ground be equal to the quantity of two thumbs
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong youth to reduce the thigh bone, and suspend one hand of the patient with the other youth, and the other youth will reduce the thigh with force, so that the joint returns to its rightful place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	More in the proper reduction, when it is a displacement outwards, cover that the patient bites down on the jaw according to what we have recommended in the former case; and keep the ligament stretched over the affected limb and over the foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two assistants shall be present, one at the feet of the patient, and the other at the head; and assistants shall be present with hands adjusted to the middle of the bed placed over which wet cloths are spread, so that the patient is not dampened because the cushion is between the patient's thighs, because you must extend the lower limbs without tension
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And every minister extends to their part, and the doctor with their hand grasps the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey respectfully, it will go very well; but if not, pause diligently as we have said in the gelbozi for that treatment
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	More cover that the patient bites down on the jaw so that it will be released from the buttocks
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the front, it is necessary that the limb be extended forward, as it is said in the aforementioned treatise concerning the thigh; and the doctor places the thumb of their right hand on the affected area, and with the other hand grasp that which is at the other side, and at that grasping pause that which is extended to the lower limbs at the front.</start_turn>
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary that the patient's lower limbs be extended, but it is elevated above the ground; because it must be supported on a hard surface, as it is said about the swelling of the limb when the outer surface is dislocated; and it is over the face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, without any spasm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to administer pressure with a table over the area where the joint is located.<end_turn>
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore when the reduction is completed as we have said — and the sign of the reduction of the limb is not hidden from you, that is to say that you extend two limbs of the patient, and when you have once grasped those and the patient extends their thigh limb and expands the lower limb, then you know that the limb is returned as it should be — and you adjust two cushions and pause close by and grasp the bandage so that the width is not swollen in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And remove the ligament and the dressing, and compare one limb with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those swells vanish in the dressing, then you know that the dislocation is already stopped, and then you allow the patient to walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of discomfort, then you return and plaster that, and withdraw that according to your first structure, and leave that for three days
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And remove that, and make the patient walk slowly for a few days, until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the care of dislocation of the thigh bone.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The thigh bone is dislocated in three ways, that is to say that it is dislocated outwards, and at the front, and downwards more than at the back; and it is not dislocated at the front
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the limb is that the patient commands the patient to flex their limb over the cushion; knowing that the thigh is dislocated
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient grasp the limb with their hand, even if you can do it above what was said; put two cushions under the face of the limb, and place the foot of the limb between the thighs; and then order the patient to grasp the thigh of the limb with your hands, and hold that between the thighs of the limb as if it were about the thigh of the limb, and another minister extend the lower limb until the thigh returns to its place
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of the limb's recovery is that their limb adheres to the cushion without suffering.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And plaster that and make them adhere the limb to the cushion, and bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not make the patient walk for a few days, until they are healthy and comfortable
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the limb is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments that preceded the treatment of the groin.
Capitol .xxxiii.	When the reduction of the limb is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments that preceded the treatment of the groin.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	From the treatment of dislocation of the ankle
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some bones of the ankle are swollen due to slight displacement, and some bones are dislocated according to custom, and the dislocation is caused either by the ligaments or by the bones themselves
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells up proceeding from the part that is dislocated
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for displacement is gentle reduction, and it is that it is facilitated by the most and that it is equalised as soon as it returns
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When the dislocation is complete, cover that the patient groans in pain, and have a strong and valiant assistant behind the two of his legs in the middle of the limb
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And put your right hand on the top of the foot towards the heel, and your left hand on the front of the foot in the place of the ankle
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with the left hand make two fingers, and extend with the left; and press the heel of the foot against the right side of the limb.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do as we have counted two fingers
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And press the foot against the third finger, and you are at the ankle
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two times according to this manner, and if sometimes the foot is equalised, it is good; otherwise, when the limb does not return, repeat the operation until it returns
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If the reduction is prohibited for you as we have recommended, then make the patient walk on the toes over the ground, and loosen a little the plaster cast on the ground, and that he sits between the thighs, and you have already placed your hand over the limb to prevent it from moving
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And let the assistant of the limb hold his thighs, and another assistant extend the foot with his hands or with the ligaments that lie over the heel of the foot; and extend whichever minister against the extension of the heel, and that the plaster cast exists between the thighs, so that the body of the limb is not pulled towards the front beyond its extension
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor will wrap up the dislocation with the thighs, and another assistant will hold the healthy limb at the front, so that the dislocation returns with ease
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And thus when the dislocation returns and you are declared to have completed the reduction of the limb, then pause the plaster and gently stretch that which is strongly ligated, and join the foot to the limb with the cast
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware or take care of the nerves that are behind the ankle, because the ligament over that should not be tight and must not be stretched too much
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it so for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, stretch it out
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And take it off on the fourth day or on the fifth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is forced to go forward despite that space, it is not wrong to ensure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive care
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If by chance it happens after the removal of the cautery that the limb must be remade, then cover that you administer in the cessation of the pain that preceded our narration in another place of care and bandaging, until it is remade
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Treatment for dislocation of the bones of the foot.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When it is dislocated, it must be equalised with little extension of the limb; and that which is not difficult, be joyful
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the ankle bones of the two feet, then make the patient walk on the toes over the ground or on a table, and remain like this as if he were going
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And put your foot down, and stop the ankle on what comes out of the joints, and hold that until it returns, and that you see that it is already equalised and does not appear again in the immediate vicinity
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And place under the belly of the foot of the limb a board that covers the whole foot, with two caps, and hold that down by stretching and closing firmly for three days; and take it off and let him walk again after forty days, until it is restored and the redness is insured
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	From the species of dislocation which are caused by swelling or fracture or any other lesion.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When these things happen, and you perforate the wound of the cure and restore it, the veins become swollen and blood is lost, which often leads to death
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, do not presume that it is enough to take care of the wound, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, experienced, merciful and patient, should take charge; and that he should use at the outset medicines which do not cause nausea alone, but which will calm the patient, for the patient will be judged by God, not by us; and he should hope for salvation rather than for recovery from the disease, and in which hope there appears some possibility.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And so he should strive to reduce it as soon as possible at the outset of the disease, giving only as much caut as is necessary.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as it should, then administer a regimen which will cause only slight caut and will cure the swelling in that which you agree with the surrounding desiccation.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is caused by a fracture and the bones are separated, then you perforate the soft tissue of the limb, and do as has been said in the simple diseases of those which precede these
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And keep and flee according to your virtue that of the instrument in the way of fear as I have foretold; for what is better for you than the Creator himself? More lasting is his glory, and more joyful is his peace than all the wealth of the world.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus I finish the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
