Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Certainly! Here's the translation:
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, children, since I have now completed this book, which is the latest work of the science of medicine, by the grace of God and the diligence of its followers, and by the proofs it offers, and by the declarations it makes, it seems to me that I must explain this treatise to you, which is part of my art, that is, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For in our age and in our land surgery is a perilous art, since great learning is required for its practice, and its secrets are very secret; and few men understand them except for a few small descriptions found in the works of the Ancients, which change everything and completely overturn the old errors and hesitations until they are explained clearly and the power of the art is extended
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is seen by me that I have composed this treatise in such a way as to follow the way of demonstration and explanation and abbreviation; and that it may be useful to the forms of the instruments of cautery and other instruments of the work as well as for the addition of the declaration and for the preparation of the patient, which is necessary
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the most important reason why no good artist can be found in our age in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that it requires a great actor who has been exercised in the science of anatomy, who knows the structure of the limbs and the form of these, and the joints and their separation; and who has knowledge of bones, nerves and vessels, their number and their location, and of the pulse and veins, and the seat of their sensation.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And thus speaks Hippocrates, that in my name there is no lie, even in small matters, and especially in the art of the hand
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And as I have said at the beginning of this book, he observed that he who is not learned in anatomy is not worthy of the title of physician, for he will certainly cause the death of many men through his errors, for many have perished from this very ignorance, for they have learned this science and abandoned the other.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish physician who, having incised an abscess of scrofula in the groin of a woman, has incised several arteries of the groin in order that much blood should flow, and the woman died between her legs.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another physician who took hold of a stone from a man who had had it in his belly for a long time, and the stone was great, and when he came to take it out he pierced it with a piece of glass, and the man died three days later
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already mentioned this, that in such cases I know of no other remedy but to take away the stone, for the greatness of the stone and the condition of the patient makes death certain
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another physician who took charge of surgery for a duke from our land, and he owed his position to a black slave who had been accused of breaking his leg; and the physician, in his ignorance, attempted to heal the fracture with sponges and bandages, without allowing the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And thus he died according to his desires, and he relieved himself, and he repeated this for several days, commanding that he be given no other food; and thus the limb was lost forever
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I went to see him, and I saw that the liament had been removed, and there was peace and an end to the pain
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed corruption was confirmed in the limb, for I could not restrain it, and I did not cease the corruption of the limb until the patient was in danger of death
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another physician who pierced an abscess of cancer, and caused ulcers nearby within a few days, so that the malignancy of the tumor increased with the master of the tumor.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that cancer is pure melancholy humor, and it does not suffice to bring it to an end with medicine, but that it must be treated by the limb that suffers so that the rest of the body may be saved
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And thus, children, it is necessary for you that the art of surgery be divided into two parts: that which is associated with health, and that which is perilous in the greatest precautions
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already mentioned this throughout this book in which I have spoken of the operation in which there is error and fear; for it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave that, so that the fools may not find fault with you and you may be blamed.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take courage and ask for the help of God, and the sick with you for help and for comfort.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And thus, through the mercy of God, you shall be saved and blessed with abundant success, and you shall cast down the terrifying diseases that are difficult to heal, and you shall overcome the other weapons of that which you are afraid, so that you shall rejoice in your faith and in your name, for it is your reward that remains in your glory, and more so in this world and in the next.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Indeed, I have already mentioned this in many of my discourses.</end_of_turn>
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“There is no medicine for a bad disease, for so it is that many doctors will not be called by that name”.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And indeed, I have already written this book according to three chapters.</end_of_turn
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of all of the first part.</end_of_turn
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered of the head downwards, concerning the forms of the instruments and the instruments of the cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.</end_of_turn
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.</end_of_turn
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of swelling and perforation, and of blisters, and of ulcers, and of the extraction of arrows and similar things, is all capitulated and ordered concerning the forms of the instruments.</end_of_turn
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.</end_of_turn
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the care of fractures and similar things; is ordered concerning the head downwards, and concerning the forms of the instruments.</end_of_turn
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of pointed cautery and acute medicine and memory of the operation.</end_of_turn
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that in which the treatise of the whole book begins.</end_of_turn
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	That I have said concerning the quality of the instruments of that cautery and of their documents, and in what combination it is prohibited to cauterize.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discourse concerning the quality of the instruments of the cautery and of their documents is a long and profound one, and subtle for science, and a secret hidden; and already many learned men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and to me it seems that little of what they have said is sufficient, fearing that it will be prolonged.</end_of_turn
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore I say that cautery conforms to all universal completion except for two completions, which are caudal completions of its matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the caudal and dry completion of the matter, disagreement arises; for some say that cautery is useful for that, while others say that it is harmful to that, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the disease be both caudal and dry with that which is cauterized and dry is healed.</end_of_turn>
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say that those who say the opposite are mistaken, that for cautery is useful in every caudal and dry disease that exists in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of a man with the humidity of his blood to the completion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say concerning this discourse that I have already experienced something like this in my studies.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But indeed, I do not say that everything that has been said should be abandoned and neglected in the chapter of cautery after practice, and by knowing the diversity of the humors of men and the disposition of diseases in their places, and the causes of these, and their accidents, and the space of time of these.</end_of_turn
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other completions, it is not about you fearing, and more so in the cold and humid diseases, for already all doctors have agreed upon these, and they do not disagree concerning the usefulness of cautery in those.</end_of_turn
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my son, that the secret of healing with fire cautery and the wisdom of it is about cautery with acute medicine, for the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member which is cauterized and does not notice the other member with it adjusted except for a small document.</end_of_turn
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	For the action of acute medicine reaches only to that which is inflamed, and it does not make it come into the diseased member of difficult healing and does not make it go out.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	For fire, by its subtlety and its substance, does nothing but what is already known to us by experience and by the length of our service in the art concerning the truth of the causes; and for this reason I am excused from the length of this discourse because it is not legible to me in this place in this paper the secret which you have hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and the safety of its expulsion of the disease, as it is demonstrated in philosophical terms.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Indeed, masters, it is known that the most opportune time for cautery and rest is during the milder days of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is useful at all times, so that it does not suffer from the suddenness of the time, for it is immersed in the support of water which makes the cautery less painful, especially if the cautery is for pains or for necessary pains, for these are strong and fierce, and it is feared that if it is delayed, there is a risk of malice, which is greater than a slight discomfort that enters at the right time.</end_of_turn>
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	I do not know of other cases, or masters, where people except the vulgar people and foolish doctors think that cautery is not useful at all times. Therefore, for that disease which is healed by cautery, it is not ridiculous at all times, and rest is enough of that consequence.</end_of_turn>
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not that they say that it is for water, for cautery is nothing but a means of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humors which are the cause of pain.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But indeed, cautery often surpasses medicine in its value and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its benefit.</end_of_turn
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that your disease will return at some other time, according to the complexion of the disease and the location of its disease, and the virtue of these things, and what is prepared in the body of these things from the accumulation of superfluities in these things, and what is obtained from these things in their acquisition through food and drink and the like of these causes; but the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in few superfluities and humors, just as if it were cautery for pain and the like of that, and possibly in these it will not return that pain, even though it is made small.</end_of_turn>
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it may well be said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and is a miraculous thing, not as those understand it who do not know it, for they believe that it is not a cure that uses medicine or any other cause except for cautery itself.</end_of_turn
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	But the cause is contrary to this; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is true only when the methods of healing in certain diseases are administered, and those medicines do not confer, and at the end of the cause it is necessary to administer cautery, and benefit from that.</end_of_turn
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And so it is that in these days it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the vulgar people and the fools of the doctors have.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And I say to you the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and I do not say this except for the equality of gold and the fineness of its substance.</end_of_turn
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And I say that the place of cautery does not make it harsh, as some people say, for indeed I have already seen that this does not make any difference except in certain bodies where the other methods are less effective; and cautery with gold is better than with iron, just as some people say; but indeed when you make cautery with fire from gold, it is not your business to declare that, for it is ignited according to the quantity you wish for the roughness of the gold, and you must prepare to receive the cold; and if you do not adjust for this, the gold will be consumed by the fire, and in the fire some scales will remain so that the artist will cut for the occupation of that.</end_of_turn
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason it is useful to make cautery with iron, you must put it more lightly and more cautiously to the right of the operation.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those chapters which are between the feet to be omitted, so that I relieve those who ask me what they want from me.</end_of_turn
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headaches caused by cold and humidity.</end_of_turn>
Le capitol primier.	Chapter one.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers relief from the accidental causes of which it is a cause of soda and multiple fluxes of humors raumatic, applied to the head and the limbs and the joints, multiple sleep and toothache, and the like of all diseases which come from cold, even as paralysis, tetanus, apoplexy, and the like.</end_of_turn
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows: first command the patient to evacuate with medical laxatives for three or four nights, according to the excess of the virtue of the disease and the age of the patient and his custom.</end_of_turn
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and make him sit between your legs on a fallen bench and place your hand over his head.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And put your thumb against the root of your nose between your nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Indeed, as the doctor has said, when the liquid of the limb is inflamed, it is a sign of that limb. And make a burn with an olive twig of this shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And put it over the affected area until it descends, in such a way that your hand is slightly constricted, and pull that out slowly.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then take your hand away slightly and hold the limb, and if you see already some quantity of bone exposed, as much as the quantity of barley grains, then lift your hand, and if you do not withdraw your hand from that side, do so from the other, if it is cold, until it is seen that the bone is no longer visible as I have said to you
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a little salt and dissolve it on the limb and keep it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And put over the wound a bandage in border and keep it there until the burn of the fire is destroyed
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the limb with ointment until it is healed
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And indeed, when the plague remains open, it is better to take honey from the branch, for it is better and more helpful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	I say to you all that the bone must be cauterized until it reaches the bone, and keep the cautery there until every part of the substance of the bone has been consumed
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And so be it that which remains of the bone is soft, and so be it cured.</start_of_turn>
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And I say to you all that it must be cauterized until it reaches the heel, for in this way it will be more likely that the bone will be strong within it, and this is the way of allaying it slightly:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And it is estimated from that limb that the vapors of the head expire from it.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the plague remains open for a long time, and so be it cured when it is solidified
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two methods of cautery in any other home, except for fear; and leave that to me, for it is better for me that you are well, rather than that you risk your life for nothing. For the head of the patient is usually developed by the continuity of the limbs, as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of soft nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first method of cautery is better and more useful, for you; and from that I have seen in this work that it is better for me.</start_of_turn>
Capitol segon.	End of text.
Del cauteri del cap.	The end of the text is not included in the provided passage.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and when it is prolonged in the disease, and when it is used with poultices and cushions and capsulars and plasters and mustard and garlic and herbs and vinegar and alum, and especially if the bone has already been cauterized with one cautery without any of those causes having profited it, then consider that if the head of the disease is of strong formation in its nature; and it is not soft and finds no great heat, then cauterize with another cautery leaving a little space.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And cauterize over the heel of the foot with the cautery until the bone is fractured.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the bone and uncover from the bone the quantity that we have recounted and cauterize that which is in the lower part of the head in the place where it is applied to the vein, — and that is the place where the swelling is stopped.</start_of_turn>
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And hold your hand still in this way, and do not uncover the bone, for the disease finds great pain from that other than from all the other cauteries of the head.</start_of_turn>
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I say that this cautery in this place is more subtle than the one which is used for the heel of the foot and the back of the head; and this is the way to do it.</start_of_turn
Capitol ters.	End of text
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of ancient cautery of emigration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the part of the head there is soft pain, or widespread pain throughout the belly, evacuate immediately with medicines that soften the head, and give the other treatment which I have mentioned in the preceding diseases; and if it does not profit, know that the cautery in this case is done in two ways: either with acute medicinal combustion or with a cautery.</start_of_turn
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May the cautery burn with the power of medicine, for you take a dose of alum, expel that, and remove the extremities of both hands from above.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And thus indicate the area of pain on the temple with a lancet, so that the hair covering the area is shaved away, since it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And thus bind over the area with a tight constriction, leave it for three hours; then remove the dressing and apply alum, and leave the wound covered for two or three days, and then rest your hand over the area until the area is healed
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that which is inflamed until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, faith that many medicines can combat these which I have written in the treatise of medicinal treatments
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be carried out according to this manner: the fire for the cautery is of this form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and is called closed nails, which have a head like a nail in which there is a small curvature, and in the middle of the area there is a small elevation
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And rest your hand over the area of pain, and hold your hand there — so that the wound is not bruised — and gradually move the fire forward slowly
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of that which is bruised by the speculum is as great as the majority, elevate your hand so that the artery is not bruised, so that there is no flow of blood
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And soak the wound in salt water and rest it on the area, leave it for three days; then rest the limb immersed in butter, and take care of the wound until it is healed
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the edge of the nail according to the cautery, and guard against the incision of the artery in this place precisely not-ancient.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery of ancient embolism.</start_of_turn>
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you have treated the embolism as we have said in the preceding cure, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and do not avail of the cure, and sometimes for the disease which does not suffice to it which we have said of the first cautery with medicine or with fire, then when you have ignited the cautery nail until it is white, because that signifies about the area of pain along the line of length of which is the majority of the finger, or whatever; pause your hand for a while and bind that until you have incised the artery and reached the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However necessary it is that you guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is bad for chewing, and that the nail not be bruised and the nerves which are bad for that, and that no spasm occur
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is concerning the custody and care of the flow of blood of the artery that is being cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially to that which ignores what is done and is not studious and is reckless; leave the operation in peace from the beginning.</start_of_turn>
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to remind you of the arrangement of the flow of blood concerning the accidental cutting of the artery according to its custom.</start_of_turn
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease that this cautery does not suffice and you see the limbs of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter concerning the stretching of the artery with two nails, and this is a better cautery and more comprehensive.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.</start_of_turn
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery of the pains of the heel.</start_of_turn
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the heel there is pain due to cold and is cured by lacative causes and by the other cure which I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has no point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And approach the point near the ignition, and bring the flame around the entire heel as if it were being revolved, or around the circumference of any abscess if the pain is in any place.</start_of_turn
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with you the cautery from the root of the heel little by little until you have seen that it has branded the area with a mark.</start_of_turn
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If the cautery has pricked twelve points throughout the heel, and which are those, then promptly treat the area until it is healed.
Capitol .vi.	If the cautery has pricked twelve points throughout the heel, and which are those, then promptly treat the area until it is healed.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	If the cautery has pricked twelve points throughout the heel, and which are those, then promptly treat the area until it is healed
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	If the cautery has pricked twelve points throughout the heel, and which are those, then promptly treat the area until it is healed
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	If the cautery has pricked twelve points throughout the heel, and which are those, then promptly treat the area until it is healed
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
Capitol .vii.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
Capitol .viii.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	When you have cured that area of the heel with lye, capis and balsam, and have confirmed that the pain has gone away, then do not touch the area with the cautery. The doctor must cauterize the area three times: first at the root of the heel, then slightly lower down, and finally at the junction of the two lips
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Therefore, if it is good for the patient; otherwise, it is customary for them to receive three cautery burns on the back part of their head, which extend from the most superior part of the head down to the most inferior part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each burn the thickness of a finger, and take care that the burn does not proceed too far.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	May be you are addicted, and the patient is tolerant of it; however, it is customary for them to receive a burn on the middle of the foot; and if you wish to make the addiction greater, burn the area over the two nails.</start_of_turn>
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Take care that within that which is healthy; and let the burn be olive oil according to the form denoting.
Capitol .ix.	End of document.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of the nails and of the mollification of all the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Because you are dealing with the modification of the head with jars and water that we have said; and place the hand of the patient over the head, and burn the area which is between the eyebrows, and burn over all the nails of the head, and burn on the back part of the head, and make three burns on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of the modification of the body of the limbs that those and the patients tolerate the disease and the disease is strong, it is customary to make four burns on the vertebrae of the two, and then burn until it is covered by the fat of the limb, and remove the hand again.</start_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Take care that within that which is healthy; and let the burn be olive oil.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .x.	End of document.</start_of_turn
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cauterization of epilepsy.</start_of_turn
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Epilepsy is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is for spasm.</start_of_turn
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, because you modify the brain from the beginning to the end of it at the same time as the other cure which we have dictated in the division when the disease is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.</start_of_turn
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer from the medicines, the hour administers astringents and expectorants, which serve to modify, giving it for several days, to the benefit of the food.</start_of_turn
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And place the hand of the patient over the head, and burn the area which is between the eyebrows, following the previous manner, and burn one burn in the middle of the head, and another burn in the back of the head, and burn over every nail of the head.</start_of_turn
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the disease is strong and is tolerant, the hour makes burns as we have said, with paralysis and mollification of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the two.</start_of_turn
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Let the burn be olive oil as it has been said.</start_of_turn
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	May be the disease is a child, the hour pauses the burn superficially according to this manner.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xi.	End of document.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cauterization of melancholy.</start_of_turn
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and large spasm, the hour makes burns as we have said in the previous section.</start_of_turn
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and decreases to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, the hour gives him to drink which softens the brain according to what has been said in the division.</start_of_turn
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And place the hand of the patient over the head, and make a gentle pressure downwards make a wound about the circle, and pause that in the middle of the head.</start_of_turn
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be allowed to rest, and be kept whole.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And pause liniment; and it is more deserving to border against sheep.</start_of_turn
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And cover that over the fire for temperate heating, which says suffering when it is in it for a month.</start_of_turn
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And put that on the middle of the head of the patient in the circle, and remove it when it is warmed.</start_of_turn
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give the patient water throughout the week once a day, with the other regimen of him good until he is healthy; or if you wish, make small points according to the best of him, but keep your hand with a pointed cautery in order. This is a kind of burn which moistens the brain equally.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And hold that limb firmly in the groin or in the groin crease.
Capitol .xii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the doctor has finished speaking concerning the water treatment for the head and the rest that I have mentioned in the division, then begin to administer the medicine and give a drink to the patient, so that it changes their head, and keep them away from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make them sit in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command them to keep their heads still, and cauterize that area around the middle of the head; and cauterize two points on two temples if it is the beginning of treatment with two waters, or one on the temple if it is the beginning of treatment with one water.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep the patient away from drafts when it is cauterized; and if you see that there are still drafts, stop any medicine that you are giving them.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I come to know the knowledge of extracting arteries and about the extraction of them and care for drafts.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And each vein is cauterized at the neck, leaving two bones with two cauteries in between them, as is usually done.
Capitol .xiii.	End of document.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the ancient cautery of tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are ancient and accumulate in the veins and arteries that are in the area of the outside of the head and it is verified that these are superfluous fatty phlegmas, then cauterize that area around the middle of the head that we recounted in the chapter concerning the beginning of water treatment in the two waters, and around the middle of the head and on two temples, and two cauteries in the neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you disagree with the addition, then cauterize that around the root of the hair on the edge of the heel with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	End of document
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cautery of the stench of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you physicians have done what we mentioned in the division and do not profit from your medicine, then you appear and give the patient wine for three nights; and keep their head warm, and cauterize the area around the middle of the olive oil
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And cauterize that area around the clove with two cauteries over the two heels leaving the hair a little bit
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep away from the thread that you do not cauterize that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the way to cauterize the clove
Capitol .xv.	End of document.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery of the softening of the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery like a new moon; and this is how you do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you like, cauterize over the two eyebrows with a little one at both ends, and they will lengthen from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery is according to the quantity of the eyebrow
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not burn your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is scorched
Capitol .xvi.	End of document.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eye when its parts are converted into parts of dust and put its hand on the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the parts of the eye are converted into dust particles and you put your hand on the eye, cauterize in those two ways, that is either by making an incision or by using a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If I cauterize the eye with fire, command the patient to drink until the tears flow again as those that are seen to fall, until they are prolonged and equal; and if I put the hand on them, then strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it is not burnt until the tears are born again.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when the attendants are born and seasoned, the doctor should place his hand over the patient's navel, and over the pupil of his eyes, as a signal which should be according to the figure of a lily flower, and should begin the signal from the nipples.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then keep your hand poised over the bladder or in the belly of the fish on the heel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And bring forth the pointed cautery of which this is the form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize on the figure which you have signaled, little by little, with smoky veined matter, until the surface of the bone which appears like a lily flower is completely consumed, which is indeed properly done
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of the completion of the work is that you see the pupil of the eye already contracted and the nipples raised above the puncture of the eye
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore raise your hand and lay it there for three days, and keep your hand poised over the bladder until the scar is finished
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that until it is healed
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	May it be that if it returns for any reason, then bring nourishment and soften the pupil, and the doctor will do another cautery over all that has already been done as he did at first
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	May the pupils remain soft, leaving the heel untouched, that the cautery be made when it is naturally elevated and softened, and that the nipples not be pressed against the eye
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May the cautery be made with medical knowledge to command the patient to lie on their side until the nipples are prolonged and softened, and indeed lay a layer of paper in the form of a lily flower over the wound
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take sponges of knowledge and cause living air to go up and down endlessly. namely, Or what you will, and mix these causes well together, and do this with speed so that it does not become angry; and expand from this over the paper which is made like a lily flower, and place that over the eye or both; and place the eye back in the bladder or the pupil of the eye should be in the belly
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And take note of the medicine and do that a little and do not delay until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which is in them just like fire
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore when you perceive that the bite of the medicine has ceased, the doctor should read the medicine and do that which has been told to him; when the bite has ceased, the doctor should remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and the doctor should consider whether the pupil is already raised as it is washed away by the constriction from the fire or from the incision, for the doctor knows that this is well; and if it does not return concerning the medicine on the place where it was not placed until the medicine is healed and the operation is complete.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And keep your hand poised over the bladder until the bone of the wound has been eradicated, and take care of that which is deafened or otherwise until it is healed
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary that you, in your operation, must keep watch diligently that the medicine does not fall from the eye, and if the pupil is somewhat days softened by any cause and the patient’s fingers press on the eye, the doctor should repeat the medicine on that place where the pupil is softened, just as he did at the beginning, and indeed in this way rather than in any other way, and keep it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of the lily flower.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that the pupils of men are diverse in size and in number, and therefore according to that is the extent of your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not be ignorant of the way of proceeding in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the lacrimal of the eye.</start_of_turn
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat the fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of the diseases and you do not confer your cure, the doctor must command the patient to place their head down in the belly, and keep the head of them from any attendant between the thighs in such a way that it is neither maudlin nor agitated in the head
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And keep your hand poised over the bladder or in the belly of the fish on the heel of the eye.</start_of_turn>
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And bring forth the pointed cautery of which this is the form:</start_of_turn
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The pain that is caused by cold humors that penetrate all parts of the body, and which appears in the feet, is commonly called gout by doctors.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if necessary, let it penetrate through to the other extremity.</end_of_turn>
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you must, let it come out thus as when you attempt it.</end_of_turn
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is concave is better than that which is convex.</end_of_turn>
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is opened, and take away the swelling and moisture from it.</end_of_turn
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the purulent matter from it.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place your hand over the area that is to be cauterized, and take hold of that little finger of the hand that is next to the nose, so that your hand does not move or that the patient becomes agitated, and when you have placed the cautery over the area, move it.</end_of_turn
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	Therefore if at the beginning of the cautery it enters the bone, it is not good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then place your hand over that part and keep it covered with moisture until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If even after passing a few days it is not healed, then place your hand over the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and is flattened as is appropriate in the head of the sufferer.</end_of_turn>
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Another method of cauterizing a fistula is as follows: enter the area of the fistula and burn that, and then place your hand over that crevice which is the shape of it: and there you will put the quantity of lead that is usually found; and keep your hand firmly in place, so that the lead does not reach the nose of the patient; and that you cover the nose of the patient with a cushion of wool or something similar, so that the lead adheres to the area of the fistula and heals that miraculously.</end_of_turn
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the cautery and the treatment that we have said, it is not good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer medicine through the nose and reduce the fistula to the root of the nose as it is appropriate in its place.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the cautery of the fistula.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many veins appear in the lips, and more especially in the lips of children.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the things that we have said in the divisions and you do not avail yourself of your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize the small cutlet in this way:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the curvature be according to the thickness of the skin.</end_of_turn
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place your hand firmly over that area until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissure.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery of the fistula in the mouth.</end_of_turn
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth there is an accumulation of pus and the surrounding area is swollen, and the swelling is broken, and the pus is evacuated, and there is a fistula formed, and if you do not avail yourself of the treatment, it is necessary to cauterize according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and put that cautery into the hole of the fistula, and keep your hand over that until the fire of the cautery reaches the bottom of it, and after that make a slight incision or two; and take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore if the swelling is abscessed and is healed, it is not good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the location and remove the corrupted bone as is appropriate in its place.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.</end_of_turn
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery of the teeth and the mollification of the veins.</end_of_turn
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are blackened, and you treat them with medicines and do not find relief, then place the hand of the patient over the head of the patient and let the tip of the cautery be in the form that you will see fit, and when you have placed it, immediately bring the cautery to the area and keep your hand over the area until the pain is relieved.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And now draw your hand away and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And now draw your hand away and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery for toothache
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is cold or hot, or if you do not agree with the treatment with medicine, then do the cautery in two ways: either with a burn at the edge of the tooth, or with a burn at the root of the tooth
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The burn at the edge of the tooth is that you take the edge of a cow's hoof and put it into the hole of iron, and then take hold of the toe and cover the extremity with it, and then immerse that burn in oil, and stop that on the painful tooth immediately until it is cooled down
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat that several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse a sponge or a cloth in the burn of the said thing, and place that on the painful tooth, and place over that the iron ignited until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	More importantly, you must take care of the color of the charcoal or of the iron, and that in the middle of it there should be no blackness, and the heat of the fire should not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And now draw your hand away and repeat the cautery several times as you wish. The heat of the burn should be such that it will cause the pain to disappear, and place your hand over the tooth until the burn is cooled; and do several times so that the pain will disappear or on this day or on the next day
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And know that after this cautery the patient should fill his mouth with good broth and keep it for an hour and then remove it; this is the way of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish of the extremity as you are able to do
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the way of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cautery for wisdom teeth
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When wisdom teeth are of flesh and cold humors and do not obey digestion with medicines and you wish to digest them lightly, then you must ignite the burn two fingers apart so that the smoke does not burn you, and place that ignited burn on that abscess once for a while, and another if you digest it, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the burn according to the quantity of the abscess, and hold it covered with a cloth for three days and put over that a sponge soaked in oil until that which the fire has consumed is remauged
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that with oil and lint and bandages until it is healed
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the way of the cannula or you must cauterize in this way to convey it
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the throat
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors are over the windpipe, and especially when they are cold of composition, then know that you must evacuate the patient with laxative medicines at the beginning, and then cauterize that which is under the root of the epiglottis in the groove that is below the root
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And take care that you do not reach the epiglottis with the burn or that you do not burn the cord of the voice but only a little bit
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that which is between the joint of the chin and the last rib of the neck
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the burn of the neck must be like that described above.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that until it is healed
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cautery for chest pain and cough
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and chest pain are of cold humors and the patient has no fever or chills and is an old illness, then you must cauterize that two times on the furcula in the grooves that are below the teeth and bones; and at another time in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and make the burn like that described above
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, make the puncture with the pointed cautery as is customary for the puncture of painful swellings.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	If you wish, make the puncture with the pointed cautery as is customary for the puncture of painful swellings; and take care that there is no more tissue than is necessary between the cautery and the underlying tissue, which is precedent to its being healthy.</end_of_turn>
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And already the cautery has not three ramps where the cautery is to be made: according to this fashion three cauteries can be made in a row.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxv.	(The text ends abruptly, indicating the end of the treatise.)</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cautery of the titillic which is the head of the helper.</end_of_turn
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is displaced by the action of slippery humors and is not fixed at the hour of reaping, you must reduce the displacement as soon as possible. And if it has happened as we have been told, that the joint has been displaced to such an extent that it cannot return to its place without force, then elevate the thigh which is on the side of the thumb of your left hand if the joint has been displaced to the inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And take care that the cautery does not have two heads; and this is the fashion of them:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And make the cautery of the thigh until it penetrates the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come when there are four cauteries.</end_of_turn
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so according to the quantity of hair; and this is the fashion of them.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And every vegetable is adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And take care to place over the cautery some salt-soaked sponges, and make the patient relax, and that the limb be not painful for any length of time until it has been comforted.</end_of_turn
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is to the outside and it is necessary, make the cautery over the muscle at the base of the thumb or over several cauteries with the pointed tip, so that the joint is confirmed and the humor is evacuated and the patient is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxvi.	(The text ends abruptly, indicating the end of the treatise.)</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.</end_of_turn
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moist humors in the stomach which cause swelling and multiply the worms therein, and if you continue your methods of care without confirming, then it is necessary that the patient be placed with their face downwards, and that you extend their legs and thighs, and make three cauteries: one cautery on the tip of the thumb and two cauteries on the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery appears; and lengthen between those which are not adjusted so that they will make a wound.</end_of_turn
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the breadth of the thigh.</end_of_turn
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery is like this, etc. And if you wish, make a large cautery in the middle of the stomach like this; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle like this.</end_of_turn
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize the stomach with the pointed tip of that cautery which is causing pain: and that you mark on the stomach the place where you wish to make the cautery, and then make the cautery in that place; and take care of the aftercare which precedes until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxvii.	(The text ends abruptly, indicating the end of the treatise.)</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cautery of the heel bone.</end_of_turn
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the heel due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind, and the normal swelling of the limb has been expelled by excessive discharge, and if you do not confirm it, then it is necessary that the patient be placed with their face upwards, and mark on the limb three cauteries like this and in this quantity above the heel beyond the hip bones, holding the heel of the limb still.</end_of_turn
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each two cauteries is according to the thickness of the finger, and the cauteries are like the length of the limb.</end_of_turn
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not make the cautery too tight.</end_of_turn
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of liquid which is poured out is equal to the quantity of the bulk of the limb, and it is not more adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then keep them still, the one who has extended their thighs, and elevate the hips.</end_of_turn
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the translation of the first sentence:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you must know that this cautery can be performed with a pointed cautery, when you are prudent and skilled in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And take care that you do not proceed too much with the cautery, and that you be attentive to the entirety of the limb so that all parts are cauterized and reach the bones, for the limb is subtle here; know this well.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.</end_of_turn>
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the perforation of the abscess of the foot with cautery.</end_of_turn
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When swelling or abscess occurs in the foot and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the membrane of the limb, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient experiences great pain and the pain is acute.</end_of_turn
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the foot, the pain is acute and often the doctors are already exhausted in caring for it.</end_of_turn
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore the patient must be placed above the navel; and then draw out the abscess with a hook; and then burn the cautery with the rag it is bound with, as it is described in the next page.</end_of_turn
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And burn until all the limb is cauterized, until it reaches the bone, until it is well healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the care of the other abscesses until they are healed.</end_of_turn
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not attempt this method of cautery unless you have studied it in the art of medicine and are familiar with many others; for many bad diseases are known from this operation; however, experience has shown that this should not be done without having learned the proper method, which is best.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery of pleurisies.</end_of_turn
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	I say that the ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristotle on pleurisies are done in this manner: take from the roots of Aristotle a long thorn about the size of a finger, which is found, and burn it.</end_of_turn
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And immerse that in oil and vinegar and put it in the fire, and burn with two small cauteries guiding, one slightly declining from the part that is below the beard, and two from the rib that is declining from the fifth rib to the twelfth, declining slightly from the back; and another at the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three at the back; and one at the place between the two hips, and two on the two sides of the foot, leaving the cautery that is between two hips.</end_of_turn
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not grasp your hand with the cautery, but keep it visible in the work.</end_of_turn
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And as I have said concerning the ancient people, they are like those of the men who use a cautery that is like a ray of iron and fire, and put that in the place between the ribs, until that abscess is expelled and is healed, just as we have said concerning the abscess of the foot.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this perforation with cautery, there is no fear, for many times this has happened in the fistula where it does not heal.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.</end_of_turn
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the ulcer.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you are treating the disease of the ulcer with what we have said concerning the care of the division, and you do not confer your care, then the burn the ulcer in three ways, which are all safe, as follows: that you make three or four lines according to the length of the ulcer according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.</end_of_turn
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery let the size be that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of performing the cautery is the same as that which we have said concerning the cautery of the foot.</end_of_turn
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not grasp your hand with the cautery; and the patient must lie above the waist.</end_of_turn
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another manner of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two assistants, as we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the limb which is at the end of the ulcer towards the chest so that it does not touch the side of the ulcer.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	The elevation should be at the height of the knee according to the length of the body, so that the cautery can be performed according to the breadth of the limb.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And now insert two lancets, ignite the flame, in that part where the knee approaches the other limb
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then withdraw the cautery; and thus there will be four cauteries in total
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize at the head of the cautery without three lancets.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then keep the cautery covered until it has ceased bleeding for several days, which is different from the other previous causes of the cure
Capitol .xxxi.	End of Document.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cautery of hydropic swelling.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery does not take effect in hydropic swelling but in albumin properly
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydropic swelling in the manner of the treatments that we have said in the division and do not confer the treatment, then cover that four cauteries are made on the circumference of the belly and one on the stomach, and one on the heel, and two between the vertebrae of the two, and one at the root of the foot, and one on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be appropriate to the breadth of the knee
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then keep the cautery covered so that it does not bleed for a long time
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Do not evacuate the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery because it is added to two understandings, and let it be fasting with the assistance of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The way in which the belly is cauterized is like a claw according to the form of that which is previous, and it is that in which the two olives are cauterized as is previous to its form
Capitol .xxxii.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cautery of feet and the parts around them
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrosis and are filled with salty water, cover that you cauterize the feet over the two toes without burning the skin; and elevate your hand over the cautery and do not touch it; and elevate your hand and do not take it away, because the salty water remains
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the cautery in this way: And make two punctures on the two parts of the foot, and in any part where it is necessary to make a puncture at the end of the cautery
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the part: leave the nail of the big toe and the other under the middle of the part; and over each part make two punctures
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that any remaining water drains from it
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And take care of the other causes which we have mentioned
Capitol .xxxiii.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cautery of the belly
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is hot and humid so that it must evacuate the verdigris, which is the digestive and retaining virtue, which is in the stomach and the intestines, and this is cured by the methods of treatment and is not necessary, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauteries of virtue showing, then cauterize that which is a great cautery over the great stomach as it precedes in the cautery of the stomach, at the circle and four cauteries in the circumference of the belly button, at the claw-shaped cautery; and a cautery over the navel over aloes large, or two punctures.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humid substances are expelled and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that over the pubic bone and over the intestines, and firmly adjust two punctures over the stomach and below the flanks, which is a perfect cure for the benefit of which you will not err
Capitol .xxxiv.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On cautery of ancient hemorrhoids
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature behind ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick cold humors or corrupted humidity, and are cured by what we have said in the division and do not confer the treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries over the base of the two small and small triangular vertebrae, and remove the navel cord with two cuts
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you suspect that the patient's stomach is inflamed, the food is not digested, and their face is sometimes pale, then cauterize the area around the stomach with a large cautery, as well as on the flanks and over the hipbone. Keep the cautery on for some time until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	When joints are affected by cold humors that spread throughout the body, and pain specifically affects the feet, doctors commonly call this gout.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Continue the treatment by performing a cautery around the abscess.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you drain the abscess, then cauterize the area with a sponge-like cautery.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place the burning cautery into the abscess and leave your hand over the area until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus has drained.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if there are two veins or more that appear to be swollen, then cauterize each one as we have described previously, and take care of those which are causing the pain until the patient is healed
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you cauterize with a large cautery over anything, it is better to delay the treatment
Capitol .xxxvi.	End of document.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	When fistulas are caused by natural factors, they are detrimental in their nature in their parts
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in their place, and the patient is terrified, whether they are healed or cauterized
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is a fistula in nature that is old, corrupt with pus and dampness, and it is more worthy that you try to close it than to leave it open.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Like a sponge-like cautery
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place the burning cautery into the fistula according to the thickness of the tissue
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat the cautery until the corrupted parts become blackened, for a period of two or three times, according to the amount of tissue to be removed
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be careful not to burn nerves or blood vessels; if the fistula is in the bladder or the abdomen, take great care of all surrounding areas; do not proceed until the fistula is in fatty tissue and you think it is not penetrating
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Take care of the area until it is healed
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the wound is sealed and the pus has been drained from it, and it remains covered for a long time, then know that it is already completely healed
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matter has not been removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the premon of its corruption, or because of these causes it will remind you in the wound
Capitol .xxxvii.	End of document
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Treatment of carbuncles
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the carbuncles due to cold or excessive wind, and to relieve the patient's suffering, then cauterize the area around the carbuncles with a cautery that has a claw-like tip, as a reminder of which is necessary
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And perform the cautery in a triangular shape, so that there will be three cauteries in a line, and thus they will be more effective
Capitol .xxxviii.	End of document
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Treatment of the bladder
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there are bladder stones due to cold and dampness, as well as painful urination, then cauterize the area around the bladder just below the ribs, at the start of the loin, and cauterize with a cautery at the flank and at the hip
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	The length of each cautery should be according to the amount of stone; and cauterize with a single cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be claw-like in shape
Capitol .xxxix.	End of document
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Treatment of the kidney
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is an excess of cold and humid air, and it is forbidden to bathe, the monthly discharges become corrupted, their provocation is delayed, and they cause pain. Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the navel with three cauteries, as we have said concerning the cautery of the bladder; and over the navel, leave two points, or make two cauteries, and keep the cautery needle firm.
Capitol .xl.	When there is an excess of cold and humid air, and it is forbidden to bathe, the monthly discharges become corrupted, their provocation is delayed, and they cause pain. Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the navel with three cauteries, as we have said concerning the cautery of the bladder; and over the navel, leave two points, or make two cauteries, and keep the cautery needle firm.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	When there is an excess of cold and humid air, and it is forbidden to bathe, the monthly discharges become corrupted, their provocation is delayed, and they cause pain. Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the navel with three cauteries, as we have said concerning the cautery of the bladder; and over the navel, leave two points, or make two cauteries, and keep the cautery needle firm
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is an excess of cold and humid air, and the mucus is spread throughout the limb, it is the cause of swelling of the foot, and a sign that the swelling is prolonged when compared with the other side.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the joint of the dislocation is found in the area where the pain is located
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the limb of the foot with a circular burn, because you have seen that it is useful in the circle when it is reversed, so that the part falls from the circumference of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery that precedes this form is that of the stomach
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize with three cauteries with olive oil.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the burn should be made according to the amount of spiciness of the whole body; and take care that it is not painful
Capitol .xli.	End of Document
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the area of the ankle, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the disease is cured with what we have said and do not confer, and what is antiquated, the hour is that you remove the pain from the humors of the blood with solid or artificial pills or something similar; and then cauterize it
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of performing the cautery is in two ways: either with medicinal remedies or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two scientific methods, the one is that which cauterizes that over the area of the ankle with three triangular cauteries according to this shape; and do it with good depth
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each two cauteries is the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the cautery is with olive oil or great
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Many people see the burn on the inside of the ankle over the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle that precedes the form of the dislocation of the ankle, and that is a continuous circle and consumes the spiciness of the whole body
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the manner of cautery of the sciatica when the pain is adherent to the ankle and does not extend to the swelling
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends to the swelling, the hour is that you cauterize with two cauteries on the swelling over the area where you feel the pain; and one cauterization over the heel for four fingers just below the cervical part
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the burn blisters, and the depth of the burn is according to the quantity of the spiciness of the body
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain extends to the area below the toes, the hour is that you cauterize here where you feel the pain with a burn of three points or four or more if you think of it.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain appears to be leaving the swelling, the hour is that you cauterize here with a blistering burn
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Keep yourself in every cautery that you do not reach the nerves or great vessels, and that for which reason you will not do any harm or contraction to the patient
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen others who have cauterized over the heel and finally at the end of the cautery, the limb became swollen until the tumor achieved the foot, and the limb was perforated and corrupted all the way through
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And take a strong solution of vinegar, and take care of death
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Say the learned ones, each cautery should be shaped like a circle of iron whose circumference is equal to the width of a palm; and let the depth of the orifice be as great as that of a date seed or a little more
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the circle is a third of an inch wide; and let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a bean; and if these circles are made in two parts, let the length of these marks be a nail or two nails, and make them on the margins of the iron that is properly placed in the circles; and this is their form
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then ignite the fire within so that it smokes and gives sparks, and hold your hand over the part of the limb, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize three cauteries round about in a row
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And thus leave that for three days; then cover that with a bandage and leave the wound open for several days; and care for that until it is healed
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Say Albucasis: or, friends, of this kind of cautery we have used little for the terror of its regard, and for what few have found that which regard over it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of these cauteries should be made to it than those that suffer from it, and find at that place of them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More cauteries are better than medicines that remain; for you make two circles having a hole pierced in the middle through which the pain of the nails escapes; let the length of the nail be two nails or as many as those
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is equal to the thickness of a nail; and if they are made from above and below, and that they contain each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And hold your hand over the part of the limb the patient is resting on their side, and compress your hand over the part of the limb; and take warm water and pour it between the two circles, and the quantity of that should be as much as a small fire, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the throbbing of the limb – for that other biting is like fire – until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the warm water from the entire limb with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And leave that for three days and pause over that border until the blackness of the throbbing is gone, and leave it for several days, and come away from it when it has recovered; this is the best remedy
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And care for that until it is healed
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or the chest, make them drink water as much as is fitting for the ankle swelling.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the way of warm water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and caustic not extinguished of both parts, take one part each, and grind them and pause in a new liquid from which the left-hand side is pierced with a small hole according to the quantity that enters into it
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Pause for a while the liquid of the other liquid and get over that alkali and caustic alive from warm water which takes those for a thumb, and when you have compressed those with your thumb for good compression, and leave the whole of what comes from the acute water in the left hand to the other liquid
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, and get the other caustic alive and another alkali renewed, for that the hour if it has strength will be administered in surgical operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other limbs, for that operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of some medicines which are cauterized widely, some are like vinegar and salt and caustic with broth which must be mixed together
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And behold the account of a man of the ancients who relates the operation and care with which he cured ankle and sciatica pain, and magnifies more than enough to be of that, and says that no other care is necessary, and that he is healed in a week just as recommended, for that is strong indeed that this remedy is in broth and indeed it has already succeeded in that
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And that it be taken in the morning of certain herbs green, and if it is not found green, it may be taken with fresh figs; and take it ground with a little barley and put it on the ankle where the pain is, or in the thigh or chest, and bind it
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	The treatment should last for three hours or for as long as the patient can tolerate the procedure.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put him in water and when the body is swollen, bring him into the sun, for the pain will cease and he will be healed.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Remember that one should never use these cauteries except for the evacuation of the body.</end_of_turn
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Now indeed I say that when the vein becomes swollen with a wound of a goat, it is cauterized; do this immediately without delay. And let the cautery be done in this manner: take wool and soak it in oil against inflammation, and place it between the toes and the heel.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And do the same with a dry wound of a goat, and bring the cautery into the flesh as far as necessary; and place the wool over the cautery and hold down the flesh until it has healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And do the same again with water, and do not cease until the sensation of the bite has passed through the ankle and the pain has ceased.</end_of_turn
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cautery of the cow.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 52.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cautery of two pains.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in the two limbs are caused by two factors, such as in the case of wounds or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for such causes, for infusion of fatty and humid matter.</end_of_turn
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	The cautery does not take effect except in this only kind which is useful for the effusion of fatty matter.</end_of_turn
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, in order to evacuate the patient from the two limbs in which the pain is present, give pills that are fitting and similar to them, and let them be useful over the two in which the pain is three lines according to their width, because otherwise if you try to burn them in any line or cauterize them, it may cause more harm than good, according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance and the power of the medicine.</end_of_turn
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cautery is useful with the pointed cautery.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries or with four medial cauteries according to this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 53.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of the cautery at the beginning of swelling.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	These girls are often afflicted with this disease in their small age; and a sign of the beginning of the disease in children is that it happens on their nails and is accompanied by elevation and movement.</end_of_turn
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find in the back the spine of the two and of the nails that it already begins to overcome the other vertebrae.</end_of_turn
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore when you see that and you want to prohibit it, when the time comes, cauterize that which is circular according to this manner:</start_of_turn>
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that it surrounds the cautery over the whole part of the vertebra equally.</start_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines.</start_of_turn
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And take care of the area until it is healed with the water that we have mentioned.</start_of_turn
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Note that the cautery should not be administered in swelling that is caused by spasm of nerves.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 54.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cautery of gout and joint pain.</end_of_turn
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout is cured by means of treatment and the pains are not left, the time comes to cauterize.</start_of_turn
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And that you cauterize around the evacuation in the circuit of the ankle with multiple cauteries.</start_of_turn
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be of olive oil of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.</start_of_turn
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If pain spreads throughout the joints or to other parts, and the cause of the pain is known, then cauterize the painful area with three or four cautery needles in this manner.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If more needles are needed for the cauterization, do not keep your hand too close to the cautery tip, but rather keep your hand slightly away from the area being treated.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pain spreads to the heel and the toes, then administer the cautery as mentioned earlier in this book
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only on the sole of the foot and is severe, then puncture the area around the bones as if making a wheel, and puncture in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain persists, then puncture around the bones on each side and on the side of the hand
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain comes close to nerves or muscles, then cauterize all the surrounding areas of the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the patient without proper treatment and the administration of medicines, for if treatment is good and the inflammation subsides, it will be evacuated with this needle alone, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of fractures.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the ankle and the bones are displaced by the atela of the tibia, and when this begins to happen, then command the patient to lie still in the bed and use soft cushions to prevent the wound from opening from the belly
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands on the bed, and command them to keep their foot away from the wound until the atela or bone is extracted.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that which was taken from the thighs and hold the fracture on the bone of the ankle with a signal that resembles the middle third of the circumference of the limb
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery in this way:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Until it is not red and has a cinnamon color
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then hold the cautery over that signal with your hand over the cautery, and do so until you have brought the bone of the ankle into the middle of the wound; and repeat this for the other side if you have not managed to do so in the first attempt with the bone.</end_of_turn>
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the condition of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine and cause death or another great harm to the patient.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And remember that when you have finished cauterizing, do not neglect the bone, do not confer your operation.</end_of_turn
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And cover the burn of the children with a subtle touch according to their age and measure.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the wound of the cautery for three days with an edge within which the wound of the fire is left to rest.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the rest in the same way until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should remain lying still on the bed for forty days until the wound is sealed and the swelling has gone down.</end_of_turn
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And cover that you suspend the nourishment of the patient according to the length of time of the treatment which makes the patient lose the strength of his belly, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort to recover.</end_of_turn
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to take away the forty days, then administer decent food properly, and keep this up for another forty days.</end_of_turn
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be mindful of work, food, drink, and a gentle voice, for when you use this regimen of treatment entirely, the patient will recover completely.</end_of_turn
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say that the treatment of fractures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you will not make them bleed, the doctor should cauterize the fracture of that which is round according to the quantity of it, and that which is extruded from the heel as much as the third part of it; and take care of that which has been said, and do not be negligent.</end_of_turn
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	E already said that the first part to be cauterized is the triangle with a triangular cautery according to this manner, because it is a sign with tension.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is kept parallel that it is for the breadth at the sides beyond the rupture, and another line below; and stop your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery is more acute and better.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery of the ankle.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When swelling occurs in various members either by injury or percussion and pain persists for a long time without relief from medications, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.</end_of_turn
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery of every member according to the size and the extent of them, and their virtue and development, and the location of the ankle and the pain of them.</end_of_turn
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if the first cautery is not successful, do not hesitate to repeat it; for it is often the case that those pains are caused by a puncture of a vein close to that member, so that you must consider that the pain will cease when the wound is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery of leprosy.</end_of_turn
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The books tell of many things cauterized with a great effort, and management if the species of leprosy which is harmful for the putrefaction of fat and melancholy.</end_of_turn
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is widespread and whether that which has been cured by what we have said in the division and not of itself, and fear the harm that the corruption encompasses the whole body and the totality of the limbs, then cauterize that on the head with five cautery instruments: one in the middle of the head, and two following leaving them, and the front towards the end of the hair; and two over two nails; and one behind, on the nape or the servant.</end_of_turn
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand over the cautery a little distance from where it burns a small empressment, and when the scales are loosened the great vapor escapes from them; cauterize over the heel as needed.</end_of_turn
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears evident, then it is necessary to cauterize that with those cautery instruments which we have said in the head; and with a cautery on the end of the nose, and two cautery instruments on the two upper teeth, and two cautery instruments on two vertebrae of the tailbone, and six cautery instruments on the vertebrae of the buttocks, and one great one on the vertebrae close to the hip, one on the hip, and two on the ankles, and two on the muscles, and two the little toes; and cauterize that on all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on all the bones of the feet, and on the sockets of the teeth.</end_of_turn
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And take care of the nerves which are above the ankle that you do not burn those.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And many things are cauterized with a cautery on the fifth toe bone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the heel.</end_of_turn
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the more cautery instruments you adjust, the greater the benefit and the greater the comfort; and you know that the body does not suffer from the pain in the cautery, just as if it had not been done, because the body is already stupefaited.</end_of_turn
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cautery instruments be large or small according to the limbs and the joints according to what is preceded by the species of the instruments.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the cautery with flour of barley with honey and with another care that it is healthy.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cautery of stupor.</end_of_turn
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is stiff or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that stiff limb with a cautery instrument according to the greatness of the limb or the smallness of it.</end_of_turn
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the cautery is made penetrating the hardness of the heel a little.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some veins are cauterized, any swelling which is caused by the mas and the feet, and the spondils of the two, and you will see the swelling of the nerves which arise from that limb, and the swelling is cured.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May not presume about anything except that which is learned in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves throughout the body moving.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter LIX.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cautery of boils that is deadly.</end_of_turn>
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When boils are old and do not yield to the action of medical unguents, then you cauterize upon that area a little at a time until the white and the color of it have changed, and the color has become altered.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And in addition take some barley and lentils with olive oil and rue leaves, and columbseed or orondo root, from each of which take a part and mix them all together, and apply a bandage and hold the area still until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .l.	Chapter L.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the cautery of carbuncles.</end_of_turn
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and swells, then you cauterize that area of circle in its circumference as it is swollen.</end_of_turn
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And say the learned that it is cauterized behind the front cautery in the middle area; but to me it is not seen that it is ulcerated, and I have already seen several veins.</end_of_turn
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more secure to cauterize in the circumference of the circle as we have said, rather than to cauterize the mass.</end_of_turn
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cautery of tumors.</end_of_turn
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some tumors are delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess fat or for the state of the patient, who is old, decrepit, weak in faith, or for the time, and you want to expedite the maturation of tumors; then you cauterize throughout the circumference of the mass except for small punctures; and in this way you will force it to mature.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	May not if you wish to make a perforation of the mass except that you ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and remove that from the middle of the tumor until it reaches the marrow.</end_of_turn
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize in that place which is more towards the left, to alleviate the pain of the limb; and hold until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cautery of carbuncles.</end_of_turn
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A carbuncle is a wandering corruption in the limb, which consumes that which as if fire were eating dry wood.</end_of_turn
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if sometimes that carbuncle is in the place where you suffer from cautery with fire, then you ignite the cautery of nails a few at a time, as it is convenient in the place where it is corrupt.</end_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And hold the cautery throughout until you have eradicated all the corruption and there remains no cause of it.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And keep it quiet for three days, and rest over the cauterized places so that they are sprinkled with oil mixed with vinegar until the scars are all eradicated and all the corruption is gone.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And take care that no ointment is applied to the wound.</end_of_turn
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	May not three times a day that the carbuncle appears healed in the place where there is no corruption; for this is not good; but if not, then you repeat the cautery over what remains of the corrupted places.</end_of_turn
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And carbuncles are treated by various means of acute medicine, which is half as effective as the cautery.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	May fire cautery be more helpful than any other remedy.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the treatment of them with acute medicine in the division, so take that when you have to.</end_of_turn
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cautery of ulcers and other similar lesions.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	The joints ache with cold humors that spread through every limb, and when pain arises in the feet, physicians customarily call this gout.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The burning cautery is ignited with charcoal similar to punishment for a whirlwind, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the gout of the whole limb, and of subtle stripes.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then rest the ignited cautery on the gout, and turn your hand over the cautery around the limb until the cautery reaches the depth of the gout
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it rest for three days until the redness subsides
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a paste of powdered alum and salt over the wound, and let the paste rest on the wound for one night, so that the inflammation will be eradicated from its root.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound with nourishment from generative ointment until it heals
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not improve, and the swelling has occurred on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, when you must administer in those incisions with cold water, take a little of vinegar or iron or punishment for whirlwind, and apply it to the gout; and pour a little cold water over the vinegar, keep your hand over it, and turn it around with your hand, and press the edge of the tube into the cavity of the gout, and withdraw the cold water slowly through the opening of the cavity; and wait for the patient an hour for the effect of the cold water to subside. Then remove it, because the gout has been eradicated from its root.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And so be it with these things and do the same with the rest of them until they are all gone from the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And take care of those things that remain, so that the roots of the gout have been eradicated by the nourishment that comes from the food that has been eaten
Capitol .liiii.	End of treatise
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cautery of tremor
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is tremor due to cold in the nerves or from excessive heat, or from another cause similar, it is necessary to cauterize four times around the vertebrae or over the bones of the spine between each vertebra; and over the feet and on the chest
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides and restores the health of the feverish patient
Capitol .lv.	End of treatise
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cautery for accidental burns of the body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are spilled fats in the body, and there are pus-filled wounds that are caused by corrupted thick matter; therefore, at the beginning when it appears, it must be cauterized over the whole head of the fistula with a fine needle and a loop of silk, the limb that is extended over the fire; or at the root of erotology longus; or with a cautery needle.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize against the beginning of its discharge according to this manner; and do not be afraid, for it dissolves the swelling and heals from these things
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it must be known that it is useful to evacuate with a tube of flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	End of treatise
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cautery for the flux of blood from an accidental wound by incision of the artery
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	There are many veins that arise from the plague that must be closed off, or from the incision of apostemas or cauterization of the limb, and when this happens, it is difficult to stop it
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when such a thing happens, quickly put your hand over the wound at the orifice of the artery, and pause until the bleeding from the vessel has stopped, and that it does not continue
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then pause for a moment the olive cauteries a few and many, by number many, and let them burn over those until they are not ignited
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a little or a lot according to the wound and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein closing it firmly so that it does not continue bleeding, and hold it cauterized until it is healed and that bleeding has ceased
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you release the tieu dit, take another cautery immediately around the cauteries that are in the fire, and do not cease until the blood is finally stopped
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Be careful not to burn the nerves here, and do not aggravate the patient's condition.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	When an artery flows freely, it is not possible to restrict it, especially when the artery is large. In such a case, there are four methods: either cauterize as described above, or extract the stone when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the limbs become burned and the circulation is restricted, or bind tightly with thread or string to strengthen the structure, or apply appropriate medications that can restrict the flow.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May the one who provides restrictions from below bind tightly with thread or string and strengthen the area with a drape or by positioning the body in such a way as to prevent burning, for pain is not to be endured.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Or if it should happen that the physician is not present or has no medicine, know that the opening of the vein must be done immediately as we have said, and understand that the restriction must be great enough to bring the pulse down to the level of the greater part of the plague, and over the cord do not permit any moisture; and over the cord sprinkle with cold water until the pulse has become calm and engorged; and take care that there should be cautery or medicine necessary
Comensa la segonda partida.	The provided text continues beyond the portion displayed, containing additional medical advice and instructions.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incision and perforation and winds and phlegm and tumors and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases in which cautery is convenient and medicine is helpful, and the occasions and causes of these, and the instruments necessary for them, in the forms of cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the sovereign part of the head to the feet
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter in that way, so that what is desired may be alleviated, regarding what has been demanded of me
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And behold, since I am about to speak, fear not, for in the first chapter of cautery it is for terror that I speak.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason I say that great caution must be taken, for in this operation where there is to be evacuation of the contents of the vein, or incision over the swelling or perforation or extraction of a tumor or purulent discharge or removal of a clot or incision of a stone or other similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	All these things are accompanied by fear and tremor and in most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I admonish you that you do not fall into that which is the state of things, for in many cases such veguadas have been the cause of the death of many people.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	Therefore some of them will be cured of their disease and some will die from it, and some will suffer from their disease for a long time, and some will die from fear of their disease
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of these things I say to you, hope and say that your health is good, and your disease is treacherous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not consent to anything that is proposed to you in this manner; and your caution must be greater than your desire; and do not presume any cause except for that which you have certain knowledge and which is beneficial to you, and to which you must have success in order to be saved
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the care of all these maladies the pronouncements and indications that are useful for your health, for in this lies your help in the acquisition of fame and memory, of love and glory
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God has placed in you his understanding and I do not wish to give you direction or protection, for that which is in his hand
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to the order of the chapters of cautery, from the head to the feet, so that what you desire may be alleviated of what you demand of it and what you have need of
Capitol primier.	First Chapter
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the care of the water which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this disease often happens in children and when the new-born touches the head of the child, his life is threatened
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And many times the cause of this is a hidden one which is not known
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I do not see this disease except in children; and in all those whom I have seen it, death has been imminent, and for this reason I have left this work undone in them
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I saw that a child had a head filled with water, and the head of the child was always so swollen that Caesar could not place his hand upon it due to its greatness, and more than that the moisture in it increased until death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And such moisture is added between the marrow and the bone, or is added outside the bone over the cartilage
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For if the moisture is between the marrow and the bone and the swelling is slight, then you must make a wound in the middle of the head with a fissure that is two fingers wide so that the moisture may escape, and this is the fashion of the spatum.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the swelling is great, then two fissures must be made according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is outside the bone, it is a sign that the marrow of the head has been consumed throughout and the water is squeezed out when you press with your thumb on the parts inwards and not that it is in your grasp
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Therefore make three fissures in the middle of the head according to this manner
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And extract all the moisture from the incision; then strengthen the fissures with strips and gauze; and give him wine and oil to drink until the fifth day, and then remove the dressing and care for the wound with gentle touches and grease, and strengthen the head equally; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	There is another method of incision which you must consider according to the greatness of the swelling and the collection of the water, for some veins are more prominent in the occipital region, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore pay attention to the incision where the swelling appears and the collection of the water, and do what you can to avoid them.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you must not pierce the artery, and if there is blood flowing from the wound, keep the patient still until the blood flow has ceased with the evacuation of the moisture.
Capitol .ii.	End of Document.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Concerning the incision of the arteries which are close to the ankles, they are called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	End of Document.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are ulcers or tumors on the heels or toes, and it is old, do not rely on wine and medicines for their cure, for their greatest cure is the incision of those two arteries
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore take care when you wish to make an incision that the patient raises his head, and strengthen the limb with rough hands to uncover the arteries, and strengthen the patient's chest with some support; and consider where the vein is; and if there is any swelling in the ankles which are depressed, do not pierce them until they are in their rightful place
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And take care of the surrounding area around the incision with care, and make an incision in each part which has a sudden swelling at the incision so that it reaches the bone, and do the same with the water of the head
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, after making the incision, stop the bleeding from the artery and tie the wound to the parts surrounding it
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, for when any vein is incised the blood is ejected with a pulsatile flow which leaps out frequently
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	Moreover if the artery does not appear at the incision, take three fingerbreadths of the space and take care with care, and do the same until you reach the bone
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you must take to get from the blood is an unc. of wine and take little or more depending on the quantity of the virtue of the patient and the filling of the artery in him
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the wound, and if there remains anything on the bone concerning the cartilage, then you must pierce it so that no further swelling occurs
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the wound with gauze and silk thread, and care for it until it is healed
Capitol .iii.	End of Document
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Concerning the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are ancient or acute ulcers that arise from agricultural humidity or because of the quality of the lacerations of the temples, or even if they are ancient and seem like those, and when these cannot be cured by the methods of medical care and wine, then we must resort to the extraction of the arteries in the temples or to the cauterization of those in the same way as we have shown
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manner of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient lies on his side; and understand that the incision which you see on the temple is the one which is shown by the sieve, for it is hidden in few people due to its intensity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden, then the hour of the patient is strong with some moisture; and quickly make the wound open with a rough sponge or vaporize the wound with cold water until the incision appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the hour you take the sponge, this is its shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And quickly scrape the clot at that point which facilitates the reaching of the incision; and immediately remove it from them on the outside and extract that from the surrounding parts until you have extracted that from the clot and revealed that from the covering which you have left there, from all parts
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Even if the artery is small, the hour involves covering that with the tip of the finger, and immediately cut a piece of that according to the quantity by which the parts are elongated and contracted, and do not impede the flow of blood, for if they are not cut they will not be cured of anything.</end_of_turn>
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And immediately evacuate blood from the wound about an inch.</end_turn> Until three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the incision is large, the hour covers that you lie on two places with firm double folds of fat or with strong strings at length, and do not cover it until the decay is complete to prevent the formation of pus and impede the flow of blood.</end_turn
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And immediately ligate the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this in that hour or do it at another time.</end_turn>
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that which is pointed at the tip of the bone at the tip of the callous until the parts are cut through, and leave in its place the work which you have done.</end_turn
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has a fever or is of scaly complexion; for the cautery is of those causes which help the drying humors, and therefore it is better in summer.</end_turn
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover immediately the extraction of the arteries that you notice on the ankle, and keep them covered with fine dust or powder, and immediately apply either a dry cure with dry medicines or a wet cure with calamine and water until it is healed.</end_turn
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another wound begins to bleed from the incision, the hour you cover that blood, either by cautery or by tying it off, or by packing it with material, and press your hand until the bleeding stops.</end_turn
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of these causes are present, the hour suspends the tie that I told you about on the place until the blood is congealed, and moisten the place with cold water of violent cold until the acute pain subsides, and be strong as you cover it.</end_turn
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more curious in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein at this point having two clips, because you have seen the two places at the attempt, and you have left out some, without igniting, until the bone is reached and the vein is divided into two parts, so that it is elongated what is between the parts, which are not consolidated by this cautery.</end_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the manner of the cautery:</end_turn
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the acute pain of the two clips is equal.</end_turn
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if there is less acute pain than with two clips, it is better, for if there is a sudden increase in pain close to either of these, it does not cause the flesh to swell with great speed.</end_turn
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is any thickness, keep the fire of the fire in those places and the flesh is split off with ease.</end_turn
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in all work and more light.</end_turn>
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two clips is the quantity of the thickness of the finger.</end_turn
Capitol quart.	End of treatise.</end_turn>
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the care of the limbs affected by the acute and acidic humors of the bones.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the humors are acidic, and it is the limb of those veins which are above the head of the femur, do not interfere in any way with the care of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already swells up and sits in front of walking like a walk of ants, and the bones of that limb are extended, moistened in such a way that they have already known them, and the nails are scaled by the intensity of the tears, which are the old methods of care for those who have undergone this operation, and they do not cure that care with space.</end_turn
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And command the patient to stretch out their feet towards the front, and immediately make three incisions along the front, equally distanced according to the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the incision falls two fingers: one incision shall be made equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the face, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelashes which are on the lacrimal bone, and the third from the other side
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep your hand from the arteries which are in two layers, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of any incision is equal to three fingers adjusted
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge dressed or dry cloth moist with it on those with which you cover him.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And immediately put the palm of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of them:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excoriate at that whole the cord which is between two incisions on the lip which is over the bone, and immediately do what is of the migration from the first incision to the second incision
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And immediately stretch out this sponge and enter through the first incision another vein and another instrument which is called cautery, acute from one side and blunt from the other side.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the bleeding of that acute one must the fatty tissue behind the cord, and the veins that descend from the head to the heel, and fill up that which reaches the migrating fissure, and cut off all the vessels that go from the head to the heel
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May be continued the incision until after the cord, and immediately do what is in the migrating fissure between the two incisions
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the amount of blood has gone out, express the places of the patient's feet with sponges soaked in vinegar.<end_turn>
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately stop in any fresh wound a piece of old cloth, and stop over those powders that are embedded in wine and oil and vinegar, and whatever does not cause pus to form again.<end_turn
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the ligament and administer great abundance of lukewarm water or tepid, and immediately care for what is of ointment of basilisk with olive oil and other things that the wounds may be healed.<end_turn>
Capitol .v.	End of Document
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the care of the tears from the cavities of the head descend to the parts below the chin.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute attack of catarrh and it continues, and sometimes the patient's feet extend slightly, and already their sight is affected by it, and their eyelashes ulcerate and their pupils dilate excessively, and in the front of the head is acute pain leading to subsequent vomiting, for these accidents the substances and the catarrh do not go out but from blood vessels of the cavities proceeding.<end_turn
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is that you command the patient to stretch out their feet towards the front, and immediately make an incision in the middle of the front, a little for the width (and begin with the incision of the left temporal to the right temporal; and let the incision be from the bone; and lengthen your hand from the eyelashes which are in the vicinity of the cheek), until the bone is exposed.<end_turn
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Exsiccate all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and immediately replace between the two lips of the incision with an old cloth or cloth of lint.</end_turn>
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately remove the clots from the powders embedded in wine and oil to prevent pus from forming again.</end_turn
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have drained all this and you see that the abscess has already diminished, then immediately care for the bones until it starts to heal, and immediately care for that which is of the regulating of the draining which makes the flesh swell, as if you were taking two loaves of wheat and four barley grains and mixing them or, in this way, make a paste and administer it to these wounds of the newly born flesh.</end_turn
Capitol .vi.	End of Document
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	About the care of what is in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that occurs in the ears is of four kinds, which are either mineral stone or something resembling stone, such as iron and lead, or of plants such as celery or beans, or of a fluid cause such as vinegar and wine and similar things, or any beast.</end_turn
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore, when purulent catarrh descends into the heel or any other cause similar to these, and the heel is swollen without any obvious reason, and sometimes the purulent catarrh, the hour it distils in any of these causes is of olive oil or slime, and then it must be extracted and made to vomit, and apply compresses to the area following vomiting.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And immediately stop the flow of the heel some drops of fat or lint, and draw out the heel from the place it was let go, because when these fats are put on these causes, they are absorbed in this way.</end_of_turn>
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not absorbed, the hour you administer the extraction of these with the instrument called epicaricary spoon, which is in this shape: ...
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is absorbed by the spoon, it is good; otherwise, the hour you administer the extraction of these with great caution.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if it is not absorbed by these, the hour you make a needle of gut and insert the extremity of the needle into the cavity of the heel and close around the needle with wax and olive oil so that nothing is left except the needle itself.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And immediately extract with the intestines with great traction, because these fats are seen as similar to those that we have mentioned before.</end_of_turn>
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Or if it is not absorbed in this way, the hour takes hold of a lighted lamp or a vessel of the kind that is taken for these purposes, and brings a basin containing the amount of urine mentioned above, and places it on the limb, and then covers it adequately with the basin mentioned above.</end_of_turn>
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And immediately insert it into the cavity of the heel with ease, and immediately dry the heel from the moisture.</end_of_turn>
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if it is not absorbed by all the causes that we have mentioned, the hour you must cut off that which is causing the swelling or spasm.</end_of_turn>
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut that is to first ligate the external saphenous vein and extract it according to the virtue of these things, and then make small incisions on the border of the heel, and open the heel in the place of the fat surrounding it.</end_of_turn
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the opening should be like a half moon until it reaches the purulent catarrh, and when the purulent catarrh is grasped, hold it with the appropriate instruments; and then close the opening at that moment with speed, and care that it be sound.</end_of_turn
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the swelling in the heel is one of the fats that grow and infiltrate, the hour you must administer treatment and extraction of these; but if you do not obey my orders immediately, the hour you take sponge-like tissue from the limb in this way: ...
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer with it the excision of that fat which is causing the swelling in the heel.</end_of_turn>
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not be astonished when you think that that is already moistened by the vapor of the heel, and place it in fat drops, and immediately extract it with nails or with a spoon, or by incision as we have said, because the extraction is alleviated.</end_of_turn
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that enters the heel cover that the disease uses for vomiting at the beginning, and fill the sole of the heel with some old rags, and put over that heel the one in which the water is, and if by these means it is absorbed, it is good; otherwise, the hour you take a number of sponges and lions according to the length of the finger, and clench those on the fire for a little while, and the patient insert one of those into the cavity of his heel and beat on the other foot over the foot that is causing the heel to swell.</end_of_turn
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop until all the water is absorbed.</end_of_turn>
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already when the water is absorbed you take paper or gauze, etc. and put one extremity in the heel and extend the other extremity over the fire until it is burnt out.</start_of_turn>
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And immediately put on another gauze and extract all the water until all the water is absorbed, and then remove that with a needle as is said of the purulent catarrh.</start_of_turn
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of the beast that enters into that heel, if it is small, do so cautiously and little by little, taking care of it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to cause awareness at the same time, the hour you administer the extraction of these with the spoon and nails, and the cause of these is less severe than all the other causes that cause swelling in the heel.</start_of_turn
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When the purulent matter has been extracted from the ear, when you have cured that which we mentioned in the division and in the treatise of distillations, do not neglect to cauterize the ear opening.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there appears to be any cause of the worms, then extract that which is thick or slimy, even if no cause appears, then take a catheter and remove it wide open, for this is the form of them
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the limb slightly into the ear according to the quantity that the patient is suffering from the disease; and then pour on some strong oil, and make the area moist, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Although if you do not obey me immediately, nevertheless, you opine and close the circuit of the catheter as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been mentioned in the treatment of worms, and you will find them in the treatise of distillations
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with the medicines which emanate from the oils in the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form.</start_turn>
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of lead, straight, in which there is a small hole, and hold flat down.</start_turn>
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus proceed as to the curvature of the catheter of containment here where it is necessary.</start_turn
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rays and wrap them around the lower part of the limb suitably, and then pour oil into the hollow of the auricle, or juice of any herb, or any other medicine which you wish of these medicines in the catheter – which is in the ear – and then insert the rays around the circumference and compress with your hand that which compression is temperate until the oil is expelled from the hollow of the auricle and the patient feels the oil drained.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused into the ear is already scorched with fire a little.</start_turn
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And take note that the cause for which you distill in the ear is not too strong, because the ear medicines do not suffer from it.</start_turn
Capitol .vii.	End of Document</start_of_turn>
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Treatment of Ear Oiling
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some girls and young women suffer from large abdominal tumors that are not perforated, and that in many cases happen to men, oil in the meat of the ear for pain or for no reason at all; and this oil some girls find useful in the groin of the ear which does not often happen, and some girls find it in the outer parts.</start_turn
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the groin of the ear, which does not often happen, is in the greatest degree of difficult healing.</start_turn
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you have cured it, cover that the ear of the patient is towards the sun and keep it there.</start_turn
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if sometimes the oil appears, open that which is the soft substance of which this is the form.</start_turn
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the limb in which it is small in width, of which one part is acute and the other is not; and the substance is of two lion heads so that it does not harm the ear.</start_turn
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the oil is for no reason born in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then take that which is thick and slimy and prick that with great ease until all the matter is expelled.</start_turn
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the oil is in the groin of the ear, then take a lion's head ray and warm that which is a little, and then put that into the meat of the ear.</start_turn
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you smell oil in which the patient finds relief, by the gravity of the head, try to compress it easily; and take note that you do not irritate the nerves of the ear.</start_turn
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And so keep on the ear marrow as much as the extent of the wound allows; and make oil for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take any other thing and put it in oil and sprinkle over it; and if the ear is already softened, then cover that which you have enveloped in cerate that is useful for oil, until the swelling subsides; and take care of that until it is healed.</start_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if there happens to be discharge of pus, cover sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the discharge, which is mentioned in the treatise of distillations.</start_turn
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Chapter VIII. Of the treatment of swelling of the eyelids which is caused by humors.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When swelling of the eyelids is caused by cold humors which infiltrate the veins at some time, some are wet and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore keep your hand over the upper and lower eyelids, and remove the cause of the swelling with the point of your scalpel. Then place your hand over the area around the eyes to prevent further bleeding
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Although pain may arise from a flow of blood, when you cauterize the area with a pointed lancet, the pain will cease
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the small veins and arteries are cauterized. The humors which caused the swelling will then return once the cause of the swelling has been removed. When the humors are cauterized with fire, they are consumed and do not return
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling of the eyelids which arises from humors.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	When wet humors are present in the eyelids, they cause swelling in their strength and hardness, and for this reason swelling is called great swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of large moisture in the outer eyelid and under it
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the treatment for such swelling is to consider whether it arises from the outside of the eyelid and is soft throughout; or from the inside of the eyelid and is hard. The cause of the swelling is usually mild
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore remove the cause of the swelling from side to side, and gently evacuate all of it as easily as possible. Then suspend the bleeding by applying pressure to the area
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if the incision has not been properly made and you have only slightly pierced the eyelid, the pain will not disappear completely
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is large, then suture it; and take care of it until it has healed
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is slight, you do not need to do more than allow the swelling to restore itself and for the blood to clot naturally
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling is diminishing in the outer parts of the eyelid, you should remove the cause of the swelling from the inside of the eyelid, and suspend the swelling by applying pressure to the area. Do not attempt to remove the swelling by incision, for if the eyelid is perforated too much, the pain will not disappear
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And finally, after the incision, wash the area with salt water; and take care of the area until it has healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment for the external swelling of the eyelid
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The external swelling of the eyelid is caused by gray matter which is generated in the layers of the eyelid, and is mostly seen in children. It aggravates the eyes of those who have suffered a catarrh of the eyelids; and it prevents the sun from penetrating the eyes because the tears are retained by these matters
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore sometimes these tears run over the face all the time, and over the face they sleep; and on the eyelids of those who have suffered from these matters for a long time, there appear wrinkles which cover the swelling. When you press on these areas with your fingers, the swelling immediately disappears
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Every kind of treatment in such a case is to remove the cause of the swelling from the root of the hair, and gently remove the hair and fat surrounding it. Then form a circle around the area according to the amount of hair contained in the circle, and press around that with your fingers so that all the hair is gathered in the middle of the circle. Then make an incision along the side of the swelling, and the incision should not be deeper than the incision made in phlegmatique swelling
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And finally, when you have completed the incision, cover the area until you reach the hair follicles, because in most cases the process of hair removal causes damage to the hair follicles by incision along the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore remove the surrounding material which you have enveloped between the thumbs and index fingers and rotate between the thumb and index finger until it is dispersed
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to stretch the incision too much, so that the blood does not leak from the wound, and remove the clots from the wound.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If the hair follicles do not appear at the beginning of the incision, then adjust the incision a little so that the process of hair removal is facilitated; and remove that as we have said. Then cover the area with a piece of lint and leave it for a while, and then remove the clots from the wound.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	So when salt is sprinkled and they pause that in the cavity of the fissure, thus that which remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And thus care for that which is sound.</end_of_turn>
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if it happens in the area around the heel, then do so with blunt cautery, for that which is sound must be preserved.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xi.	Chapter eleven.</end_of_turn>
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of methods for handling humors.</end_of_turn
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the palpebras of the humors there is a natural excess, leaving them in their natural position and causing old age, these humors become acute and cause various diseases such as excessive tears and softening of the palpebras and the membrane between the humors, which is the cause of the destruction of the humor that is called the evacuation of the humor, and the cure is in four methods: either by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine as is said in the chapter of cautery; or it is useful to attach with incision and suture; or by cannas as I will say.</end_of_turn
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore keep your hand over the patient’s abdomen; convert the pupil of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, well and good; otherwise, prick in the part where it is faithful to the limb beyond the pupil, and make the needle penetrate faithfully downwards, and that which is — from the margin of the pupil where it does not move — from the pupil, draw out the thread from the parts below the pupil, and convert that part to the ray.</end_of_turn
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Therefore make an opening in the part behind the pupil beyond the greater lacrimal canal until the minor lacrimal canal; then extract the thread and leave the pupil covered with small pieces of lint or wool, and close over the pupil with a bandage, like the figure of a holly leaf.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But indeed keep in mind that the figure must be according to the degree of elevation of the pupil, for that which already differs among men, for some require that the incision of the pupil be made in great quantity according to the degree to which the pupil is softened.</end_of_turn
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And thus make over the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the greater lacrimal canal until the minor lacrimal canal.</end_of_turn
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the wound is like that of the king, that is, large.</end_of_turn
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And thus put on the sponge in one of the two angles of the wound, and then strip the whole thing, and adjust with the suture the two lips towards the belly or downwards, and withdraw the intestines, and adhere that which superflutes from the veins over two eyebrows with various means, if you wish, or otherwise do not cure.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And thus keep the sutures of the veins for three days or four, and then care for that.</end_of_turn
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the dressing loose from the sutures, and care for that which exudes and contracts, for the pupil is elevated because of the sealing of the wound and the adhesion of the parts; but better is to leave the sutures. Therefore I say that the old men are accustomed to evacuate.</end_of_turn
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Indeed concerning the patient, be solicitous about the patient, and it is a good operation, and do not be afraid.</end_of_turn
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method in the evacuation is that you sign over the pupil like a holly leaf, and then elevate the pupil with three nails separated and joined in this fashion:</end_of_turn
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if this is not possible, have the nails, and that which is not swollen, then take a needle which has thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread over the greater lacrimal canal, and the thread according to over the minor lacrimal canal, and adjust between the thighs which we call the veins with equality, and then with your hand over that which you have raised elevate the whole wound as much as you have recommended.</end_of_turn
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And thus adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and care for that which is sound.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if after the incision you see that there is an aftereffect from your incision or your wound, do not touch that but keep it still and moist.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Every kind of bruise that appears on the pupil that has been made by the cautery must be treated as we have said of incision; for indeed the suture in many cases is more artificial.</end_of_turn
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To evacuate according to the cannas method is as follows:</end_of_turn
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And thus you should convert the pupil and split the figure according to what I have recounted; and for this purpose do two needles or two fine wires of such length as the length of the pupil and the width of them less than the width of the pupil.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already pierced the extremities of any part, where you have the thread.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some material under that which flows over the pupil of the eye, and tighten the threads of any part with great strength, and leave that for a while, because the cord that is for the tightening will die and become brittle and will break if it is not taken out immediately.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, however, the hour has passed the thorns, and immediately care for the wound until it is healed
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidated, the pupil is elevated and the pain is gone
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to do two needles that you will do according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and take the quantity of the length and the width neither more nor less
Capitol .xii.	End of Document
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	The elevation of the pain in the eye with a needle when the pupil is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the unnatural ones are hard and rough and prick the pupils, the time for the operation is when you take a fine needle and place it in that place of soft fat and bone, and that you adjust the extremities of it so that they do not move in any way
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the thread is like the quantity of a palm
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And thus you leave another fine thread behind, and tie the extremities of that one if you wish
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's face down on the belly if he is able, and let the sun shine on your work so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and small operation
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle at the root of the pupil adjusted as necessary, and make that penetrate the pupil quickly until you extract the foreign body from the natural pupil
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And thus withdraw the pupil inward and insert it into the alixate, and let the pupils remain for one or two or three and no more
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And thus pull your hand away from that which has been extracted along with the natural pupil from the pupil in the eye
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is necessary to remove the alixate from the parts beyond the thread that you have placed in that, until the alixate from the wound appears.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And thus with the vision of the eye, when you have grasped the alixate and the thread, and groan somewhat and clench the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the pupil adheres to the place and appears above that good flesh
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the pupil is less, the time you adjust a pupil longer than the natural ones, and you elevate it in that way, or that you leave it until it is almost equal to some space, and the time you elevate that one
Capitol .xiii.	End of Document
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the care of this inflammation that appears in the pupil from within.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is inflammation in the eye, and the pupil contracts when it is contracted inward or to the left or right side, due to bad consolidation of pus or of ulcer or cautery, and there is an appeal of leporine, and this is either acquired or accidental, and is useful for the consolidation of pus or ulcers or cautery, or for preserving their bad curvature
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of operating in it is that you make that consolidation and separate the edges of it, and place it in that where there is a piece of soft lead between them, and bind them up until they are healed
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not neglect the care of the causes which cause it, constraint; for if you do this the inflammation will return more violently than at any other time
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in these cases which soften as fennel thus when it is bruised, and soak with water in which they are soaked at a high temperature and seeds of lead, or ointment of ipecac, which is liquefied with some oils, and immerse that in it, and care for that one
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your care is that you perforate with all the skill that is not consolidated in the manner that we said at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned, is nothing but the rectification of this inflammation that does not restore the shape of the eye as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	From the care of this disease which is useful for the palpebra of the feet.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This disease which is useful for the palpebra of the feet, which is called gout in truth; and it is of them natural, or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental it is caused by a wound or by a cut or by a burn or by other means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of operating for it is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and you leave that in the flesh, and that you pass the thread from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the parts under the needle and hold that under the needle, and prick at a sufficient space
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if you return the shape of the eyelid according to that which covers, it is not good; and if not, take the scissors and hold that in the split figure, and on that convert the eyelid, and make the two incisions on the side of the lower eyelid
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extremities of the two incisions are at two angles of the incision, which has been useful until they meet, and is of them useful angle until when they meet, is useful figure of them
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then hold the flesh that for the quantity that is the width of the foot of the limb, so that the eyelid is held
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and keep those under the thread of silk; and then care for those as we have said of the soothing medicines and of the bandages so that it is healthy
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the disease must be for a wound or for a suture or for a burn, then cover that you have made with a flat incision over the edge of the eyelid according to what is preceding.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the words of the care of this disease when it is external or internal, that it runs in its operation, according to that which is prepared in the form of this disease, and that is in the form of diverse motas.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artists always prepare an instrument in any way possible for it to make return to the natural shape, or in any other way, and that disease according to that which it is useful for the operation and the instruments in the greatest abundance
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion happens to several people at once, that it is solidified the eyelid more outside with the album of the eyebrow, and that it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore cover that you enter the limb of the foot of the eyelid, and elevate in those which, or extend that with the thumb
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then prick the adhesion with a blunt needle, which is not of the sharpness of the incisions, having made an obtuse a small extent so that the disease is not disturbed by the operation, and remain the piece that does not remove the eyebrow from its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such as to scratch that adhesion with ease until the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and that the adhesion is completely healed
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put on the eyebrow in lukewarm salt water in which you wash; or distill in it of vinegar dissolved in water
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eyebrow with gauze of lint, and place over the eyebrow a bandage of linen infused with oil of poppy seed, and on the third day use of astringents so that it is healed
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of the nail and the emergence of the flesh of the lacrimals
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Wisdom that the nail is according to two ways, that is either nervous, which is like a hard sponge; or non-nervous, which is like white moisture solidified, which when you touch it, or force it to take it with the thumb, is detached and the thumb does not stay in it
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these species do not begin until from the greater lacrimal which goes little by little covering the vision and prohibiting light and movement of the eyebrow
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way of working in the incision of these is that the disease does not rest its head in the belly if so, and approach the eyebrows and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with the thumb of little duplication and extend that to the parts under it
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will keep the blood inside the nail.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then keep the wound open at the edge of the tear duct with a spatula or small forceps, and remove the natural tear sac so that no continuous flow of tears comes from the wound
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if necessary, nail the nail with the nail polish or thread, as we have said, and then it is enough to have spat out the sponge of which this is the form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Beware that on the sponge do not touch the cornea and that you avoid its breakage, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then take the wound away and sprinkle a little powdered salt or do so with vinegar, and wait until the next day; and take care that there is no swelling inside that it should be healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, or if it is not fixed in that place, the hour is that this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed in this way just like before and as recommended in the division
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to suture that, take hold of the patient and take a sponge of sponge of freul acute according to this fashion:
am subtilitat.	with great care.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rare and is confused and comes to that place, the hour distills from your hour in the head of the vinegar by doing with vinegar or with salt, and put the head inside the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And thus repeat the operation until everything that is of it is removed, except that the cautery should not be put into the head because the hour will read that, and care for the wound at the beginning so that it should be healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And thus repeat your operation about that until it is healed
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The swelling of the tear sac, if you notice it in the head for a great number of days, be suspended with nail; and pierce that part of it, and do not finish the wound so that no flow of tears comes from the wound
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And thus distill in the tear sac vinegar and do with vinegar until it is healed
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</end_of_turn>
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the suture of the garden or of what is born from a nail adjusted in the head.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some veins in the heels of the radix are born of a yellow nail, and are over-extended until they cover the pupil, or approach or stretch over the eyelids and tightly compress the eyelids to the sides and are collected like a bundle of brushwood.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation in them be that the patient keep his head still in the belly; and take hold of their heels of that and collect all that yellow nail in nails convenient to them, and take it with a forceps or with a basket; and pierce the nail at the beginning until everything is finished with the needle, and keep hold of the head that you do not damage that which you must do with your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your suture to which you pierce those or the sponge which we have recommended in the piercing of the nail, or with small forceps as are collected together according to the form of them as mentioned in this chapter.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when the wound is completed and all that yellow nail is removed, then take hold of the head and sprinkle over it powdered salt, or distill into powder of vinegar and similar to the corrosive medicines, and leave over the wound with cotton wool until the cauterization is certain
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains any cause of gardenic and it is lordly painless, and fears cauterization, then read the head and care for the wound with vinegar until that cauterization departs, and repeat about that which has been operated until it is healed, and do the same with the nail that happened in this kind of wound
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must know that all care of the vinegar head by nature or by chance, or with iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	When there is collection of pus in the heel.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	The pus that is in the heel is seen to fill the veins, which are thus closed off, hindering the healing process, and must be let out over a long period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning to assess whether the pus in which the heel is filled is strong or not, for there is no other disease of the heel except pus, and then you must collect that pus
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to suspend his head over the groin, and then suspend those veins with a sponge or two according to your prudence; and let that sponge be doubled in this way:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or so two sponges gradually in a body according to this manner:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And collect those veins with fine forceps, with delicacy, and remove them an hour or two later, until those veins have become soft again and have returned to their place
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Beware that you do not damage the heel at the edges of the spur; and if your operation is in the morning before sunrise, and if you are firm in your operation that you do not irritate anything except those veins
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, when the heel is cold again, you must drain it through the opening made for that purpose so that the remaining pus is softened.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect it all in that hour, and when you have plastered everything up with that which remains, and when you have read for some days until the pain has gone away and the swelling has disappeared
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this process until the patient is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the way of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of swelling to the nose
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When swelling has been cured by cautery or acute medicine, when it has not been cured as it should be according to the narration, do not force it but make an opening in the mature abscess in order to extract all the moisture that is in it until the bone is uncovered
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is uncovered and sometimes in its corruption or blackness, the following method must be used
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called rough head, and is made without incision, and the head is rounded as if it were pierced with a needle (as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And rest it on the corrupt part of the bone, and with your thumb rotate that between the thighs said, and press your hand little by little until you feel that that corruption is gone
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if there is some pus, restore the limb with drying and astringent substances
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the limb is consolidated and there is a good mark of healing in it, and the abscess has burst from the body and has remained for forty days, and has not been renewed and has not been washed out and there has been no accident in it, then you know that it is healed
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	Otherwise, do not force it but reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: take away little by little as much of the soft tissue as iron or acute medicine will allow, and when the bone is uncovered, take three stripes according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The limb is triangular, and the body of the bone is first extended towards the limb as sometimes happens with the heel
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And rest it on the bone, and that of the tear duct; and gently extend your hand over the limb, and with your hand rotate the limb until you have pierced all the bone, and you will feel the pain disappear as soon as you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore restore the limb with astringent and drying medicines in this way.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the mark and the limb are hardened, the matter which was flowing from the wound returns to the nose, so that this is the most curious thing about the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the heel
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel swells completely and does not decrease at night or during the day, the following must be done: let go of the pain, and keep following it, and give the patient rest and calm; and apply liniment to the heel which is made of acacia and aloe and beeswax and marrow, and spread out the plaster over the heel with some fine powder
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The manner of the powders is that you take cloth of lions' mane, and each fold is doubled four times; and make of those folds.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those on top of each other according to the quantity that is needed of them.</end_of_turn>
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And press strongly on those with a hard and firm structure; and repeat the blistering with vinegar until it is sacrificed; and prevent the blistering and keep the wound clean and dry day and night.</end_of_turn>
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Even if the ligament is softened, care must be taken that it is not too straight.</end_of_turn
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And prevent the ligament both day and night as we have said.</end_of_turn
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the swelling has already subsided, well and good, otherwise repeat the plaster on the powders and the structure and the blisters until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxi.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the beginning of the elevation of the uvula of the tunica.</end_of_turn
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uvula of the tunica, and it is prominent and the eyelashes are protruded like a barley grain, and it is desired to remove it, the form of the home must be made for that, and the water must be instilled, for when you enter the needle into the radix of the uvula from the side towards the back, and you put the needle again in the place where the fold is doubled of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and extract the first needle according to its position; and then you insert the needle into the place of the doubled fold and bring that part of the uvula into the circle of the needle, and press that firmly.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and rest over the swollen area infused with alum of lead and cleanse until the thread comes out of the eye.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for the wound so that it is comfortable once the swelling has healed.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And many times a round of all parts around the circle of the eye is gathered in a prominent prominence, and it must be perforated with the fine needle that comes out from the front of the eye, and run off the fatty moisture, and lower the eye and enter immediately.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And press until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxii.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de alconati.	On the care of alconates.</end_of_turn
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alconates is nothing but a wound which is adjusted in the eye resembling dew descending and is not that.</end_of_turn
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of working on it is that you make the patient lie over the seat which appears swollen and protruding, and take hold of his hair at two points and do not remove it until you see the healing take place in the lower parts, and do not let it descend, and keep it clean, and the patient will see the cause of the disease just as it used to be.</end_of_turn
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downwards, you know that it is dew.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared for the descent of the healing to take place, then make the patient lie down on the lower part and take a pointed cautery and burn over that part of the cornea which is between the white of the eye and the tunica cornea in the corona (where the blood vessels are), until the healing is expelled.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore when it is expelled, then you instill in the eye cold water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And care for it with the other causes until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxii.	End of document.</end_of_turn
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the care of the dew that descends from the eye.</end_of_turn
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the kinds of water in the division and what is proper to perforate with a needle declaring it, according to the healing.</end_of_turn
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	And you must make the patient lie down on a cushion and hold his eye tightly shut.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And put your left hand over the inner eyelid, if the eye is the left one; or with your right hand if the eye is the right one.</end_of_turn
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take a sponge with your right hand, if the eye is left; or with your left hand if the eye is right.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then pause the extremity of the thumb close to the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the heel part of the lacrimal gland, and then peel the thumb away with force and turn your hand over.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then pierce the heel and sit that the thumb has already arrived due to the wound.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And cover that the measure of the thumb at the crease is equal to the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black; that is the crown of the heel; for you will see at that point the pupil with the vision of the eye for the clarity of the cornea
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And pause the thumb within the socket where the water is, and then pull its tip downwards a little further, and thus if the water descends too much, the hour will see the illness above which the sight has been blurred, and the thumb in the hollow of the heel
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And pause a little while; therefore if the water has descended, the hour will pause that other pull downwards since the thumb will not be broken.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Therefore when it is quiet and does not descend, the hour will extract the thumb easily, and turn it a little at a time, and then dissolve in the water a little of clear gem salt and at that time wash the heel well with vinegar; and then pause the heel outside or stop or bandage infused with olive oil and gum and put it in the water with the heel
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we must know that these things are from our time and pause over that ointment with vinegar on the heel
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your thumb at the entrance of the heel for its hardness — which is some of the men who have a hard heel like this — the hour covers that you take the sponge which is named alberid of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce at that joint, and do not touch your hand in the wound, and do not do so until the thumb is well joined to its place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And thus remove the thumb as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must praise your work, whether it is prepared for the sleeping patient who descends with fayt in which he sleeps over two in a dark room, and whether it is prohibited from all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And rest in the nature of water so that its nature is softened, and do not move the limb towards the fractured part or towards the side of the wound at all
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligament be set according to its disposition within the third day.<end_turn>
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And thus loosen that bandage in that dark chamber and expel the excessive heat from the sight, and make it see several causes, and then return the ligament within the day seven.<end_turn>
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover that you must do in the hour of the treatments or at that time the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	There must be cover that you alienate water so that the water does not burn excessively and fiercely regarding the matter
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if the wound comes loose, the hour covers that you remove the heel before the seventh day, and correct that with water which flows away from the wound.<end_turn
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	The hour will restore the sight of the eye and pause over the face of the oral cavity for which it is governed, leaving it there for a few days, since it exists in the dark chamber.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And thus gradually remove from that chamber and speak of its causes.<end_turn>
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in this art not to see a few times is not excused by the disciple of vision, and the hour will be confirmed in the operation.<end_turn
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And already some of those who are learned in this matter have said that it is useful to apply fire in the Ayrac magdaam which is perforated by which the water is sucked up.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But indeed we have not seen in our land anything like that which has been perfect with regard to water, or that which is lawful among the free men of the ancient times; and it is possible that this is new.<end_turn>
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it is about those who do not know those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are useful either for ears or for iron properly, and their extremities are in this triangular shape, the acute extremity like that which is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXVIV.<end_turn>
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment of the limb nothing in the nose.<end_turn
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various carns in the nose assembled like a scorpion's tail or like many feet of a polyp, this disease is called polyp which is like that foot represented.<end_turn
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that case where the lion's carbuncle does not fraudulently or cancerously grow, cover that part of the patient's body which is causing the pain with warmth, expose the nails of the foot, and prick the area with a needle in those parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract that which has protruded from the wound, and immediately cauterize that which you have understood from the breadth of the wound until you see that the entire carbuncle is evacuated; for if any remains of it should remain as a cause of possible abscess, then immediately do what is necessary with one of the subtle instruments in order that from it no further cause should remain
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Or if the honourable lord rejoins us with serum or vinegar after the cautery, then immediately stop; or if it is malignant pus, then cover and cauterize that until it is evacuated and the cavities are completely healed
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then take vinegar or vinegar and water or wine on the nails immediately nearby the wound.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Or if the nails are swollen and moisture has proceeded into the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Or if the moisture does not penetrate as far as the nails which are not suffering from abscess, then know that it is not pus but merely yellow spots on the nails which do not signify an abscess
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore cover faithfully that which is causing discomfort, do not touch it with your fingers, and wait until every digit or limb has rested for some time; then relieve the patient of the pain and introduce one limb of the body into the nail at the root or for any other cause which makes this possible
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that has happened, that the smell has vanished from the nail before it has reached the channels of the nails, then wipe it off the greasy skin, for the girls of the school are accustomed to this action, and it is a light cause of that which you wish to make it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then remove both limbs of the body, one which goes over the nail and the other which remains in the nail, and immediately apply warm compresses to the nails which are in the limb.  Do this until you see that the carbuncle has been evacuated from the nails of the limb
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the limb, and immediately place a bandage over the wound a distance of three days or more until the wound has healed and the carbuncle has gone away.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, after the cause has passed, insert a lead catheter into the nail for several days until it is healed
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	And if you are in doubt about the care, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the way in which the capitula is made, from which are distilled oils and medicines for the nails:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this with silver or gold, which is like a little lamp with a wick, as well as with a little cone, and the meat should look like this
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like this, with a needle at the end of it, which is flat and uncovered; to which you must attach that when you extract the oil or whatever you want from the herbs and roots.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This capitula is precious: recipe of castor oil, white balm, ginger, saffron root, long pepper, mastic, and angelica root. Mix it with the juice of almonds and vinegar, and make pills, and let one pill be dissolved in lukewarm water, and give it to the patient on the nails just before.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of those things that naturally happen in the limbs of the nail
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The nails which are naturally crooked are a great marvel and are esteemed for several days until they recover their normal shape
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason you must take care of them from the beginning of their appearance, and keep them until they have healed completely
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And immediately stop applying the plaster or cautery or any burning medicine which you put on it
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Or if it is too late for the application of the plaster to be effective, know that it is soft, dark, yellowish in color and has little sensation; do not touch that which is abscess of the nails, for it is full of great malice for that which has caused it
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the urine is yellow and not dark, and sometimes when it starts it is possible in every case, the hour evacuates the bad air and incites that sensation of fear, and heals the wound with that which exists and contracts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	If the urine is yellow and not dark, and sometimes when it starts it is possible in every case, the hour evacuates the bad air and incites that sensation of fear, and heals the wound with that which exists and contracts until it is healed.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	From the suture of the nose and the lips and the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by habit
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Wise people say that when the continuity of these cartilages is dissolved by an accident, little confidence is had in that operation except in the case of the wise
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you must apply some cause of these to any, consider whether it is a fresh plague or a healed wound, and the hour you adjust the two lips of the plague to the suture, and then heal that which exists until it is healed
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the continuity have already been separated, and some part is healed, the hour you cover that some part of your coat has appeared until it has healed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And so you adjust the two lips to the suture and strengthen those, and over those sprinkle pure salt and grease it, and place over the salt a piece of plaster of Paris or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that bound for two days or three, and then remove that and change that plaster and leave that until it has healed
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the manner of the suture be that you add the continuity of the solution or with needles just as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the continuity of the solution with a thread just as well as you do and make known
Capitol .xxvii.	End of Document
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of that cause which occurs in the two lips in the parts of the tooth.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Move gently towards those homes in the parts of the teeth of their lips some of those apostemas that are like grass seeds, and some are smaller and some are greater
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, cover that you convert the lips and the holes every part of those substances, and over that put a poultice of herbs and leave it until the wound is contracted, and after that wash it with vinegar and cure the wound with that which is styptic, until it is healed
Capitol .xxviii.	End of Document
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of the cartilage adjusted in the gingivae
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Greatly of the great veins that are not over the adjusted cartilage of the gum which they formerly call pulp, where we cover that you suspend that with an onion or that you have the forceps and cut that out, and leave the wound to run or let it heal naturally
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And so pause over the wound with salt or another powder styptic or excitative
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that cartilage returns, the hour incites that again, and cauterizes that, because that with the cautery will not return
Capitol .xxix.	End of Document
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason of teeth with iron
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the parts of the tooth and of the socket and between the gingivae are adjusted sharp scales, legs, and some veins are of black color and are harmful citrine or verdigris because the gum appears to them corrupted and the teeth are loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore we cover that you remove the bad air between your teeth and put your hand on the head of them in the belly, and scrape the teeth in which these scales appear as sand until no remains any cause of it, and what remains of the black and citrine color and other things that may have appeared is modified
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore if it is late at the beginning of the reason, it is not so; but if not, the hour you repeat the reason over those three days until the fourth day comes in that in which you will be.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have needed various root movements of different shapes and various figures according to the way you prepare your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that the root with which the tooth is cut from the part of the tooth is another than the root with which it is between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots must be prepared by you which you will see many of them:
Capitol .xxx.	End of Document
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the extraction of teeth
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Since you have cured the root of the pain, and it is completely banished, there is no cause to fear the remnants of the disease, for they are sublime substances that are excused in the eradication of the disease.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May it be known that when the disease is definitively eradicated, that is when you must declare that the painful tooth has indeed been eradicated, for the remaining pain is nothing but the disease itself departing, which has ceased to exist in the sound tooth. We have already witnessed this in the treatment of other ailments.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, as you must declare that the painful tooth exists, and that you know well that it exists, know that it is necessary to circumscribe within the circle of the tooth wherever there is any virtue, until it is dissolved from the root of the tooth in its entirety. And indeed, this is what we must do with those who have teeth of ivory, or delicate enamel at the outset.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And indeed, you must hold the patient firmly by their large thighs for good speaking or stupor, and suspend the patient's head between the painful teeth that you must hold so that it does not swell, and then draw out the tooth according to the rule without causing greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And thus, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and put it aside completely so that it is easy and laborious to extract the tooth from the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	Moreover, if the tooth is fractured or rotten, know that you must compress that fracture and strengthen that area with a subtle ray at the extremity so that it is not fractured during the constriction of that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And know that you must work cautiously with excision in the circle of the entire gum and keep your strength such that you do not break that area and leave it incomplete, and return over the patient for the greater part of the pain that is left of the disease.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And keep in mind that you must not do what ignorant barbers do in their frenzy and boldness regarding the eradication of their patients, since they do not administer what we have recommended. For indeed, what is left of the great diseases that remain after these people have treated them is often more difficult to extract, and their roots remain whole or some of them, or that they extract the tooth without removing the bone from the jaw, just as we have seen with certain people.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And finally, after the eradication of the disease, rinse the mouth with wine that has been boiled with caut or wine vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows out spontaneously, as is often the case with these people, then immediately sprinkle some powdered alum or sprinkle over the wound, and if that does not suffice, cauterize.</start_of_turn>
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The way of holding the forceps and delicate pliers that is appropriate for grasping the tooth at the outset is either with a long handle and a short handle and a thick one, so that they do not bend when working.</start_of_turn>
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And indeed, as often as with these, when you first grasp them with those of thick handle, they are not bent, but the long handle is broken.</start_of_turn
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And indeed, India wire is useful for descending, and ordinary tweezers are useful for extracting teeth that are intertwined with each other and that break due to excessive force, as well as those that have a beak-like shape like a heron, which is quite common, and which require great force.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxi.	End of document.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	About the eradication of teeth and the extraction of the bones of the jaws that are fractured.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must eradicate a tooth that is fractured, know that you must suspend over the area around the affected area for a day or two until the swelling subsides; and indeed, put on an algesic or hold the pliers together in such a way as to resemble the beak of a heron called ciconia or heron, with the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The pliers are useful for grasping teeth as well as for liming or abrading them.</start_of_turn
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey my orders with these pliers or tongs, know that you must place your hand over the root and scratch all the flesh away and then insert the instrument that has the name of a little shovel, so that the force is small like this:</start_of_turn
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And indeed, make the handle of the pliers or tongs short and thick, so that it is not broken.</start_of_turn
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is fractured, do not be afraid; and if not, help me with other instruments, of which these are the forms: the first instrument has a triangular handle with any thickness.</start_of_turn
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second sentence translates to:
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already with this instrument, having two ramps, this is the proper shape for the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which I will describe later, whose shape resembles a razor for teeth; in this case, this instrument which is like a large spoon, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	triangular with a broad or short handle, of whatever thickness, and not blunt so that it is not chipped.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing to know is that the instruments for teeth are like these other instruments
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artificer be skilled and experienced in this art, for he will find for himself various instruments according to what he understands of the operation and the various diseases; for these diseases for which they formerly did not say or did not know of any proper instrument, due to the different forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if there is pus, then the hour is to grasp firmly over that place with the hand which is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and to help you with that which is the shape
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	and be of any size, small or large, and be bound or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely extracted; and then restore the place with suitable medicines at once.</end_turn>
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if in the bone is a little pus, then grasp that of that pus and of its blackness, and care for that until it is healed.</end_turn>
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.</end_turn>
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the care of the teeth eminent above the others.</end_turn
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course for those of this shape is jagged, and especially when they tend towards the feminine, and especially towards the noble gums; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is nothing to another tooth, and it is not possible to perform a filling or lining on it, then the hour lies in extracting that; but if it is not attached to another tooth, the hour you will apply that instrument of which this is the shape; and it is like a surgeon's knife, and is made of Indian steel of a fine edge.</end_turn
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be with the one which you will apply that in a few days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not rough like the others.</end_turn
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is exposed to filing, the hour is to file that with a file of Indian steel of this shape:</end_turn
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of Indian steel, the edge being well ground; and be of such a size as to file without causing harm to the other teeth, which may be caused by the needle.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And return it to its place at the end, and grasp that of the pliers.</end_turn
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth from which a part is fractured and the tongue sticks to it, the hour is that you must ligate that until the expected part of that fragment is broken off and equalized, and be filled up so that the tongue does not stick or the word does not corrupt.</end_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.</end_turn
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.</end_turn
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth before suffer concussion and loosening by percussion or extraction, and the patient does not suffer from pain, and you have cared for that with medicinal substances, and it has not helped, the hour is that for so that they do not fall out, gold should be used for those that are strong, and not silver, for silver turns green and soon becomes poor in a few days, although gold never changes.</end_turn
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the gold be of such flexibility and thickness as is sufficient to enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take hold of the gold and take twice its length between two healthy teeth, and that you gradually increase the thickness of the gold between two decayed teeth, or if one or two, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth of the other side.</end_turn
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And finally, repeat the process until you reach the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is not decayed.</end_turn
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your striction be with which you strengthen the gold be above the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.</end_turn
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And finally, insert the excess of the gold above the pliers or tweezers, and add them in every place with your hand, and convert them so that they are hidden between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue.</end_turn
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And thus she reads that which is stretched out like Rome.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is swollen or limp, stretch out that or those as another friend in such a manner at all times.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the way of the teeth and the figure of the rectification of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, thus as often as these are linked.</end_of_turn>
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one tooth or two are returned, then immediately after that they cause some place in the area, and that they are diminished thus as we have recommended, and that they remain.</end_of_turn
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not make anything but good artificers and wise men.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And every woman is apt for any cause of the bones of a cow, and it is useful for them as a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is absent, and is strengthened thus as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.</end_of_turn>
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the initiation of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibits that.</end_of_turn
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is found behind the tongue by some women or is natural to it, or is accidental and occurs by plague which has already solidified.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that we burn the mouth of the patient, we saw that it does not exist in the belly; and we elevate the tongue and immediately puncture that ligament nerve according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retraction.</end_of_turn
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or denudation, and that which is left for the consolidation of the plague, when you have cut once you split that for the latitude until you have split the ligament and the nodulation has been dissolved.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And keep that there is no useless fissure in the preparation of the limb and that you split here with a needle and go away with blood flow of health.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And thus make the washing of the remnants of the incision with oil or vinegar or with cold water; and immediately stop leaving the tongue loose; so that it does not solidify again in any way.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is blood flow of health, stop over the hairy area that has been injured; if the blood boils, then cauterize the place with a pointed cautery which we recommend to apply to blood.</end_of_turn
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And thus care for the rest of the causes until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.</end_of_turn
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of wisdom from leaving the tongue.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some women suffer from leaving the tongue after eating, resembling a small knot which hinders the natural operation of the tongue; and for that reason it is often increased until it reaches the mouth.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in it is that we burn the mouth of the patient sitting in front of the sun and consider the prominence.</end_of_turn
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if at times you see yellow or black, rough, to which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is cracked.</end_of_turn
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then put on the thumb in it, and puncture that with a needle as thin as possible, and split it completely; and if there is blood at the time of your operation, then stop immediately with a cautery, so that it is hairy, until the blood is clotted.</end_of_turn
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And thus return to your work until you have finished with it, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that which is the other care for water until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.</end_of_turn
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of the wisdom of two ears and that which is nothing in the throat and of the other prominences.</end_of_turn
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they are inflamed in the throat, these are salivary glands which are joined together and which are nourished by two ears, which when you care for them with water as we have said previously and they are not healed, then you consider if the prominence is hard, of yellow color, with little sensation, then do not touch that which is iron.</end_of_turn
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of yellow pus and the reason is large, then do not touch that which is iron for the flow of blood; remove that which is soft, and either you will take that out or it will break by itself.</end_of_turn
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white color, radon, and its reason is subtle, then that is which covers to be incrusted.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you consider the operation, giving your attention, if already the afterglow of the burn has passed or is diminished by any diminution; then do you do well to administer the patient the sole, placing the head of the patient on the thighs, closing the mouth of the patient, and the servant grasps between their thighs as much as the tongue of the patient allows without any noble instrument, of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	Whether it is of silver or of gold, and it is subtle like a coat of paint.</start_of_turn>
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you promise it to him and he shows you the afterglow, and you touch that which is on the thigh, then take hold once and stay there, and pull that which is outside as much as you can.</start_of_turn>
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing which you must pull is any cause of the tunics, and indeed incides with that instrument of which this is the form:</start_of_turn
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is made like forceps, but the extremities of it are bent, so that the orifice of any of those is in the belly of the other, not pointed, which is of iron without a handle.</start_of_turn
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then do you incides with that sponge of which this is the form: And it is acute from one side, not acute from the other side.</start_of_turn
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having incrusted one wound, incides the other following this manner of incision, and prevent the wound from being washed by water.</start_of_turn
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of urine, keep water of decoction of millet or of ivy leaf and remain until that of the causes stipulated is over until the flow of the urine is restricted, and care for that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And many vegetables grow in the ground, others after these afterglows, and you incides those according to what you saw and said in the incision of two wounds that are equal.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I already treated a woman who was born in the ground of her, who had a postpartum that tended towards a dark color, with little feeling, which already closed the ground of her, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and I had already forbidden her to eat and drink water, and she was on the verge of death if it were not that I stayed with her for a day or two.</start_of_turn
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the postpartum had already eaten two ramps before I arrived for two days.</start_of_turn
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I held her fistularly and stayed with her once, and I pulled that out, and I took away a great part of it, and I incides that which I did not understand from the other side, and I opened her mouth, and I compressed her tongue, and I stayed with her in that postpartum.</start_of_turn
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I removed a great part of it, and there ran out only a little urine.</start_of_turn
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, absolutely, that is the ground of that woman, and she began to drink water and to eat immediately, so I did not stop inciding that postpartum for a long time, and afterwards another postpartum took its place of that, which I incides until that one is prolonged.</start_of_turn
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, I went with water and cauterized her ground, so as to prevent adhesion; and I remained there and did not notice that from that moment on I would see God from that moment on.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxvii.	End of text.</start_of_turn>
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the beginning of the illness when it is postpartum.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the swelling subsides from the limb, and it is postpartum and long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the outer part large and round, and then it is called buba.</start_of_turn
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed with the water that we have said in the division, and you do not comfort your care, sometimes indeed when the postpartum has gone out already and is subtle, then it covers that you incides that which is aggregated round; and if it is to that length, and is bloody, of a yellow or black color, and is not to its center, then it covers that you fear the incision of it, for in that there is fear of the patient.</start_of_turn
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you do that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient vomit and compress the tongue with the instrument of which process is its form and stay with her until the sponge is in the new one, and pull that out and incides that with one of the two instruments which are said in the incision of two wounds.</start_of_turn
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And cover that which is beyond natural limits, otherwise if you extend it too much, you will make them scream.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And reduce the incision, use of that which we have recommended in the incision of two incisions, and care that it be sound.</end_of_turn>
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	More if the illness is repelled by the incision, cover that when you make the burn in the cautery, do not make it too acute, for if you do, you will burn the patient. Take the tongue from the patient and take from the container the liquid which we have mentioned in the head of the cautery, and make it soft, and do not make it thick or viscous, and fill the cavity with the instrument which has this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Similarly, the stretching out of the cavity where the medicine is placed is like the curve of a bowl, and rest the instrument on the medicine over the vulva. The patient will lick over the lips so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of the patient may be mixed with the medicine, so that no cause of discomfort arises from the belly of the patient and that the patient feels relief from that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand on the medicine and press that on the uvula for a space of a quarter of an hour until it is softened and calmed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a sponge and cover that over the limb of the patient, and immerse the sponge in the medicine, and put the limb on the sponge in a canula so that the sponge adheres to that canula, and do as many times as necessary until you achieve what you wish from the cautery of the toe, and then let that dry up so that it falls off on its own within three or four days.</end_of_turn>
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you think it necessary to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and make the burn vanish from the circuit of the toe with the sponge in contact with the border, and mix that which is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash that with fresh water, and dry it off with a bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of care is more useful than incision and more long-lasting.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some say that the ulcer of the uvula is cured by that which is subtler than cautery and incision, for it is cured by fumigation in this manner: take calamus, rue, origanum, rosemary, Arabic gum, chamomile, and barley, and mix them together, or some of them, in a ball. Immerse the ball in vinegar and water, and let the vinegar bubble. Put a piece of sponge over the bubble, on which place an instrument of iron according to this manner; either make it of silver or of iron.</end_of_turn>
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the limb be introduced into the patient’s mouth until the vapor makes the uvula rise above the canula, until the uvula is not opaque.</end_of_turn>
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this over the ulcer until it is dry, and keep that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an attack of fever, for it would be too strong for the fever, and do not do anything rash, but must declare the attack of fever from the cautery.</end_of_turn>
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Or if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a tube and put in the limb of the patient a piece of sponge, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, for the sponge of the sponge prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.</end_of_turn
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for health.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 88.</end_of_turn>
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of stones and of that which adheres in the belly and of the other causes.</end_of_turn>
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Ulcers adhere to the belly or the heel or any other cause.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then cover that which you see is apparent, with the tongue resting on the instrument that has teeth like teeth of a saw, so that you may be told what is in the belly.</end_of_turn
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the belly, cover that you make the patient vomit the contents of the stomach when the food is digested in the stomach, for that strengthens the hidden cause of the belly if it is not vomited; or that you make the patient swallow the contents of the stomach with a spoonful of salt or a spoonful of radish or a spoonful of bread dry; or give him a spoonful of sponge sea salt and bind that firmly with faith, and make the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where the stones are and are extracted, that is when it is forgotten.</end_of_turn
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and bind it firmly to it with a thread, and when it has been extracted put it on the table and say that it has been extracted; or take a fist and bind it firmly to it and say that it has been extracted.</end_of_turn
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	May it be that you have not remembered those causes which we have spoken of, for in this way one must use a plum instrument in the following manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	May it be that you have not remembered those causes which we have spoken of, for in this way one must use a plum instrument in the following manner: make it larger than a small plum, and at its extremity there should be a concavity into which you insert your thumb with ease.</end_of_turn>
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the cap of the thumb upwards, and keep your hand away from the sides of the wound, so that it does not press against the bone or the marrow, or that the physician puts his hand on it.</end_of_turn>
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, since the patient is more sick, because of their knowledge of the location of the underlying cause and because they can touch it, they should throw their hand at the instrument towards them, as much as is prepared for them until it is forgotten.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxix.	(The provided text continues with further medical instructions and observations.)</end_of_turn>
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Extraction of the infected blood clot from the golayro.</end_of_turn
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood clots are treated with what has been said in the division of the cure with medicines and not confirmed, consider the time in the patient's groin at the sun, for you have compressed their tongue with the instrument which you have recommended.</end_of_turn
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if sometimes the blood clot comes out, extract that which is small or slightly protruding downwards adequately.</end_of_turn
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you are unable to extract it, take a concave needle and insert it into the patient's groin, and place on the concave side of the needle a burning iron, and do as many times (until the blood clot is dead and remains in the groin) and abstain from giving them anything to drink for the whole day.</end_of_turn
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And prepare a basin full of cold water, open the patient's mouth in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not touch it with any cause and make the water flow for an hour or two with your hand, so that the blood clot dries as the water goes down.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However if it has not been forgotten as we have recommended, keep the patient covered with a sheet or blanket with the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.</end_of_turn
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do thus, so that it falls.</end_of_turn>
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of performing this operation in the fumigation of that is that you take a bowl in which are burning charcoal and cover the bowl with a cover on which there is a hole, and put at the bottom of that hole the extremity of the instrument; and immediately ignite the charcoal; and when the smoke has cleared, place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the needle, and close their mouth so that the smoke is not forgotten until you know that the smoke has reached the blood clot, for the blood clot must fall.</end_of_turn
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation several times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and give them bland foods and herbs, and do not drink water, and if necessary, you must take this treatment outside.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood clots are treated from the groin; and it is similar to forceps in this way as well as in others, except that it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is flat against the groin, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a heron, which is hooked, in which is grasped from five, so that when any cause is pressed, it does not slip away.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xl.	End of Text.</end_of_turn>
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the word in the opening of abscesses and in the section of their parts.</end_of_turn
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are various species, of various methods, as remembered from this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and section of them by two methods, of which one is for the species of abscesses in themselves; and for what compresses of humidities.</end_of_turn
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the accidents of the body occur, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from the abscess that occurs in the joints; and each one of them must be treated by operation.</end_of_turn
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses that must not be perforated but must be treated at the proper time of the evacuation of the pus in them or alongside them.</end_of_turn
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So, if other symptoms appear which cause them to tremble when crossed, and which are not mature according to their degree, thus also symptoms which are proper of joints, because a symptom that appears near a joint will extend throughout that circuit until it reaches the outermost parts of it, and will corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, because of the cause of contraction of that limb; or is a symptom of a principal limb, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is mature, it will not harm the principal limb; or is of the heel, therefore perforate only when it is not mature. Do not perforate carelessly, except for an improper digestion, but only when it is of the heel, so that you do not weaken the heel and make it elongated at the distant parts of the heel, and so cause fistula, or that it be in the end that it is not healthy.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Indeed, you must know the time of perforation of the symptom, and that is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it is mature when the pain ceases and the fever subsides, and when the swelling and pulsation diminish, and the sharpness of the symptom, and the other signs
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And that you must know to perforate when the pain subsides and the swelling diminishes from the root of the symptom
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation must always be made either along the bone or the limb, if the symptoms are in the parts of the head or the feet, and in the place of lacerations, of the strings of nerves, of the arteries; and in general, in all the places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use perforation according to that limb
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	More than when the symptom is in a fleshy place, the time is that you must read the perforation of it as soon as its digestion is confirmed according to degree, as we have said; for if you perforate before that, it is prolonged the course of the disease and its mortality, and it makes the edges of the limb stiff and deep
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More, some symptoms must be perforated according to the breadth of the bone or the limb, as necessity demands, or according to what the limb digests.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must administer little perforation, in great symptoms great perforation and wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the symptoms
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are those symptoms in which you must consider the tendon to be concave and inflamed, when it is useful as well as when it is in the end that it remains, just as in the case of drunkenness and swellings
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those which are indicated with a section having three angles; and of those which are indicated as in the shape of a sickle leaf, just like the symptoms of the ankle bones
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those which are indicated with round section and crescent section, and which are similar to these
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More, he cannot say that to those to whom it is not possible like external symptoms that appear on the surface, that you must perforate only with superficial perforation, or only flat.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And you must know that when the symptom is great and has already collected a lot of healthy matter, that in this case you must perforate it and do not hesitate to extract everything at that time; having extracted a part, and then put back the symptom inside the other day, and extract another part greater, and so on until it is completely cured
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And more if the illness is of cold temperament, or fever, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude, for the vital spirit of animals is resolved with the evacuation of the unhealthy matter, and thus the illness is cured, and you must do the same.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter with great care, and consider your perforation in which you perforate these symptoms, because you must remove the swellings and take into consideration whether the swelling of the symptom is little or is a flat section, when you administer which of them or the antidote; and if the symptom is great, and the tears of the perforation are many, you must pause mechanically until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the symptom a part of the tendon is detached or has been depressed in the circuit, you must surround it with old cloth or thread of silk, as when you have carried pans or razors, with moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and repeat the process until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	More, if blood flows out in the hour of your operation, you must administer cold water and vinegar in which there is a piece of silk, and pause that over the area of the flow of blood until the blood clots have formed.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the bleeding persists, you must administer regimen and care and powders which I have recommended in many places of our book and division
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	May it be in wintertime, the place of the apostemes is a place of moving nerves. Therefore cover that you are pouring powders of vitriol and oil from a cautery over the area.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, then cover that you pour powders of alum or with oil or with wine and oil. Keep it moist until the third day, as we have said, and cover that you remove the apostemes and evacuate the abscess and administer healing to them until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of apostemas universally, namely according to the way of distinguishing we have already said of every apostema in what manner it is the way of caring for them individually.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 61.</end_turn>
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the incision of apostemas which occur in the groin of the chapter.</end_turn
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the groin of the chapter there are small apostemas, and of species of knots which contain tunics that are to their making; and the species of them are movable.</end_of_turn
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from these there are pus, and those that contain humidity resembling lime.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those that contain humidity resembling urine, and resembling lead; and from those that are soft.</end_of_turn
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of those which are not to be feared, as when you extend those which are not to be feared.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the incision of these is that you grasp them with an instrument of the kind that you see here, which is called entromes, until you see that it contains.</end_of_turn
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what is contained is humidity, then cut that by incision according to length by superficial incision as follows:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the incision of the line of B to the line of G. And when the humidity is evacuated, then you should excise that by which that humidity is contained, and do not leave any cause of it, for if there remains any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And immediately immerse the limb in unguents of Egypt, if present, or in water and salt; and fill it with that the wound and leave it until tomorrow, for it is because of that that the water corrodes all that is left of that membrane.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And do this again about the limb in unguents of Egypt repeatedly and finally if you wish, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that membrane; for the wound will be cured by the unguent until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the apostema contains fatty nodes, then you must cut that as follows:</end_of_turn
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	by making an incision without form of cross, and grasp nails between two edges of the incision and remove that from all around, and strive in the extraction of the tunic that contains that.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	However much your incision may be contrary, then do that which I have recounted to you first.</end_of_turn
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And in the same way do in the lapiliferous apostemas of incision and care as you have heard; and the incision of the lapiliferous apostemas is lighter, for it is of little pain and little humidity.</end_of_turn
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And there are many physicians who are accustomed to these apostemas which are in the head in the bones of old women with whom there is no humidity; the cause of which is that I do not know how to dissect an apostemal in the head of an old woman and I cover the apostemal as if it were a deaf, rough, white stone, which could not be squeezed out, and if any of you should wish to do so, please cover that.</end_of_turn
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	However in other apostemas that occur in the head another is not this chapter, namely those which occur at the heads of children, and you must take the reason for the oedema, for example, the cause of the swelling of the tonsils, however the incision of these is superficial only.</end_of_turn
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower part downwards so that it may alleviate the body of the pain to the lower parts.</end>
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And take care of those with that which is convenient to that of care.</end>
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 62.</end_turn
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the incision of scrofulas which occur in the collarbone.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	The fat that accompanies these apostemas is enclosed in the collarbone and in the breastbone and in the armpits; and some accompany these in other parts of the body.</end_of_turn
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And thus those that happen in the groin, and those that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is outside their own tunic, just as in the nodes and abscess of the head, just as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are boils, which are some that have rough edges, and those that contain moisture, and those that are malignant which do not yield to treatment.</end_of_turn>
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that part where you sometimes have a good disposition of the touch, where the color of that which is manifested is proper to the color of the codena, and which is harmful throughout, and which is not annexed to the nerves of the groin, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and which is not pulsating, because you must prick it with a needle so that it does not spread further from the surface of the part down to the part outside the body along the line of G. Enter the line of B, and scorch it throughout. Extend two lips of the codena on all sides, or on three sides if necessary, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.</end_of_turn>
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious not to prick the vein or nerve.</end_of_turn>
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the sponge not be too acute, that you do not put your hand too close to the wound, or that you frighten the patient, and that you do not prick anything that is not necessary to prick; for if you prick the vein or artery you will prevent your operation, for when you pause in the plague of the vetriol trissat or other powders which remain flowing from the wound, open the wound and leave the contents that remain in rest until the inflammation has subsided and the wound has become softened and the swelling has gone down.</end_of_turn
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the wound has been closed.</end_of_turn
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation as soon as you have finished.</end_of_turn>
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if there is any other small scrofula in the groin, inquire about it and prick it and remove it.</end_of_turn
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein, cover that so that you do not prick the large vein.</end_of_turn
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Be careful that you keep your hand firmly doubled strong and that you leave that which falls by itself spontaneously.</end_of_turn
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in vinegar Egyptian, and care for it.</end_of_turn
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you prick the scrofula throughout, cover that you adjust the two lips of the wound and keep them pressed so that no pus escapes.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If sometimes there is escape of pus due to the greatness of the scrofula, cover that you understand how to prick the root of that, and remove that and administer sutures and what is said.</end_of_turn
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And as for those scrofulas which contain moisture, prick that with a superficial perforation here where you see the maturity of them, and stop perforating when the pus has gone down from the belly, just as we have said.</end_of_turn
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And administer the perforation cautiously, with lukewarm water and similar to those, to prevent any damage to the surrounding area.</end_of_turn
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the wound has already begun to heal, care for it with warm water of the kind which generates within it until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter LIII.</end_of_turn>
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the heel of the abscess outside the knee.</end_of_turn
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	I say that this incision in the heel has never been seen by anyone in our land.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of this sermon.</end_of_turn
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And in women there has never been an excision, for it is avoided for the extraction of the heel, as for which reason it is not useful for helping with the pain of all the veins and the major arteries of the patient.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	And in those who have abscesses caused by bites in the mouth or heel or two nails, when the disease is not in the bone, cover the use of the incision of the heel to avoid the loss which is useful for perforation.</end_of_turn
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when you want to, prick the heel outside three circles of the circles of the heel, or four at a small distance for the width in that which there are two circles for quantity, that the incision be in fat, not in cartilage, and this place is suitable for incision, for it is private of flesh and the vessels of the blood of the wound are loosened.</end_of_turn
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is inexperienced, cover the time that the golayro extends the knee on one leg, and then make an incision in the knee until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sanctity if they are seen for any reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And so make an incision as we have recommended; and it is significant to section the canal for the flame which is in that eye that is from them disrupted and for the evacuation of the pus.</end_of_turn>
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour is ripe in which the perforation is feared, add two layers of skin to the edge of the wound, and so only will the cartilage remain.</end_of_turn
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then give medicines that make the flesh disappear until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And say of Albucasis that the sum of the words that we have recommended, exposure is nothing other than to see that some of these afterpains have already oppressed the golayro of the disease, and the disease is overcome by death, and the spirit has departed from it, and these remain to puncture the epiglottis so that the disease can breathe over the area of the wound for every breath, and be saved from death.</end_of_turn>
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And thus I command you to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed; and the malice of it is for three days; and therefore I command you to close the wound when it is healed, and care for it until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant brought a bowl and put it on the knee of the patient and made an incision in that part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to care for it, and I covered the mucus like it is done from the dead, and uncovered the wound and covered the blood that was there with the saliva that was in the wound little.</end_of_turn
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I confess that no vein or nerve had been pierced, and that the blood had gone away from the wound, and it was healed when it was healed.</end_of_turn
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not blame the servant if she did not recover from the wound, and I told her that she would recover at the disposal of her abilities.</end_of_turn
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section of the apostema which happens in the external golayro, and is called hernia of the golayro.</end_of_turn
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This great apostema called hernia of the golayro is great according to the color of the flesh, and is not in the women.</end_of_turn
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, either it is natural or accidental.</end_of_turn
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one it is not the work of healing.</end_of_turn
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, one of which is like grass knots, and the other is like an apostema which is caused by the swelling of an artery, and in that one there is fear.</end_of_turn
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make an assumption about it like iron, but only in that one which is small.</end_of_turn
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you must know that if you find it like grass knots, and it is not suspended by any vein, then you must puncture it just like the knots, and extract what is in it from the skin and the fat; and if not, the whole body must be inspected to find out what is causing the pain, and to take care of the area until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the species of knots.</end_of_turn
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of these knots there are many species and I have already mentioned all the species in the division.</end_of_turn
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it must be known that I recommend the difference between a knot and an extrusion as it causes doubt.</end_of_turn
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that in an extrusion there is heat and fever and violent pain until the inflammation of the superfluid has ceased; and it is completed by corruption when the fever, the pain and the heat cease.</end_of_turn
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a knot is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains that lion's head which is to the sac itself.</end_of_turn
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the flesh, and it begins like a cheese and is done just like wax, whether it is greater or smaller, and there are two species, one of which is like grease and contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division.</end_of_turn
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore cover, when you reach the care of the node, that you expel that one and inquire about that one at the beginning as it is called internal medicine, according to how it appears in the capital that is appropriate for this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is a custom to inquire about apostemas and all nodes, that you grasp this pain and introduce that one into the place where you find it in the apostema, and you will remove the strings said with that little by little until you know that the pain has already penetrated the skin
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then finally place your hand according to the measure of the size of the apostema, and extract the intestines and consider what is left of them.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity, whatever its color, has been discharged, then you will scratch it superficially as I have said in the other apostemas.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no longer any humidity left from the intestines, then you know that it is fat
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it over them in the shape of a cross like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	thus as taught, and suspend that one on nails, and strip the skin from all around easily, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	May be it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many clots are seen therein, and you will extract it piecemeal until no cause remains of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, little or much, the node returns according to the way
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes some small part remains, then complete the wound with a few sharp corrosive powders and stretch the wound, and place your hand over that which is called apostema cauda, and care for the other cure until it is healed
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you will hold its two lips and care for that which encloses
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	May be a pulsating vein is contrary to it, or not pulsating, then you will cover and fill the place of the scattered hair that is old and rough that is there and that streak for two days or three until the wound is healed and the fever has subsided; and then return to scratch what is left of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.</start_of_turn>
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the necessary pains in incision and perforation.</start_of_turn>
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the intestines, and there are three species, which are large, medium, and small.</start_of_turn
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large intestine is like this:</start_of_turn
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium intestine is like this:</start_of_turn
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small intestine is like this:</start_of_turn
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of alum, of fallen limbs conveniently, so that they can retain the intestines within the apostemas.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experts, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.</start_of_turn
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three species, which are large, medium, and small.</start_of_turn
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large expert, form of him:</start_of_turn
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium expert, form of him:</start_of_turn
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small expert, form of him:</start_of_turn
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	I believe that these are for those apostemas and exits and fistulas and swellings so that between these there are bones and other causes.</start_of_turn
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, round about, lions, like great needles with which the threads are sewn, and they are made of gold, or of silver, or of iron, or of lead. The thousand are when they are made of gold.</start_of_turn
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black plum seeds, which are remembered that for those the fistulas are opened in the concavity of which they are reflections, which are reflected back with their elevation with those reflections.</start_of_turn
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, which are some of them long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.</start_of_turn
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large expert of plum:</start_of_turn
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced physician of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the experienced physician of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of nails are of various species, some being simple, having only a curvature, and others of three species: large, few and middle.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are blunt nails, and three species of them
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails that have two curvatures, and three species of them
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are nails that have three curvatures, and three species of them.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple nail, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a middle simple nail
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple nail, form of it
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a blunt large nail
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a blunt middle nail, form of it
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a blunt small nail, form of it
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large nail having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a middle nail having two curvatures
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small nail having two curvatures
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large nail having three curvatures
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a middle nail having three curvatures
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small nail having three curvatures
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scorched, and there are three species, of which one is large, one middle, and one small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a middle scalpel
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the cutting is made are sharp, and the others are not sharp, and they are not to be grasped in such a way, but rather because it is necessary to do so in order to avoid the incision of a vein or nerve, and for those that it is useful for the health of the patient and to bring tranquility in a small way to the discomfort which is found alongside the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of dressings, and there are three species: large, middle, and small, like herbs
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large dressing:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a middle dressing:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small dressing:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are useful for wool and resemble hair like the one with which one makes alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extremity where the point is pierced with a covered spatula and in which one runs towards the buttocks and the outside, when you wish, like those which you see
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers of the hand, make the perforation of abscesses and do not perceive the diseases, and there are three species: large, middle, and small
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of these:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of winds with which the flow of blood is obstructed, and there are three species: large, middle, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are useful for citrus wool, round with some length, and they are subtle
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you must know that these three species of winds are necessary in order to obstruct the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and when you do not take them at the first opportunity it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to obstruct blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, like in the abscesses of the limbs and the buttocks, and in the abscesses of the veins, and of the breasts, and of the belly and the groin, and it is like that of fleshy abscesses of moisture.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And many vegetables are useful for these small things resembling fish scales according to this form; for which the blood is obstructed when it is necessary for phlebotomy, or for incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Every vein is round according to this fashion.
Capitol .xlvii.	Capital letter xlvii.</end_of_turn>
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Concerning the care of the breasts of men, which are made up of women.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some veins swell the breasts of many men because of sleep, and they should be swollen, and their breasts should be bound together like women, and they should be calm, quiet.</end_of_turn
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to him who says that, cover that it is done in the crescent of the moon according to this fashion, from the line of B to the line of G, and remove the whole roughness, and replace the wound with a medicinal plaster, and adjust the two edges of the wound together, and care for that which is inside so that it becomes healthy.</end_of_turn
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	More so if the breast hangs downwards towards the lower parts and is softened by its magnitude just like women, when it should be cut into two equal parts like a sickle, at two lunar figures, of which each one contains the other at the end of each one, until the major line contains the minor line in this fashion from the line of B to the line of G. And remove the cord which is between two edges of the wound, and keep the swelling, and administer what has been said concerning the suture and the powders that are necessary for the healing until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not comply with the incision of what covers the incision due to the discomfort of the patient and for the flux of blood, then cover that you cover the wound with a poultice soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that which is inside until that which is rotten is removed, and care for that which is inside until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlviii.	Capital letter xlviii.</end_of_turn
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Concerning the perforation of apostemas that come from behind it titillates.</end_of_turn
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These apostemas that come from behind it titillate are of the species of scrophulas, firm, which contain a membrane that is a sac.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those which contain humidity; and those which contain humidity cover that they should be incised in the lunar phase according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when everything is evacuated from the apostema of the marrow, then you should fill it up with old cloth and remove it the next day.</end_of_turn
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the wound both outer and inner treated with convenient ointment until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the apostema is of the species of the nodes, and of the scrophulas, then you should cut over that as we have said in the section concerning the scrophulas evenly.</end_of_turn
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	More so if the wound is extended in such a way that it is difficult to reduce, then administer in it cautery as we have said before.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlix.	Capital letter xlix.</end_of_turn
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Concerning the incision of apostemas that occur by ligature or by vein.</end_of_turn
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the ligament is broken, and the cord which is over that is consolidated, then move the veins that occur from the apostemas and the signs for which it is known that they inflame and apostematize are for the artery or vein: for when the apostemas are for ligature, they are long aggregated in the front of the body; and when they are for a vein, sit on them where it is stuttered.</end_of_turn
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is for a vein is round to the manifestation of the body.</end_of_turn
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision concerning this apostema is an error, especially in those who are in the aisles, and in the armpits, and in the groin, and in many parts of the body; and it is not great, so cover that its cure by iron should be avoided, and that which is in the limbs, or at the head, should be avoided.</end_of_turn
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More so concerning that which is for the inflammation of the orifice of the ligature, cut in the cord section in the long; and immediately cover the incision with nails and hold the ligature, and remove the tunics until it is revealed.</end_of_turn
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And immediately put over that needle and make it penetrate through to the other side, and open the ligature with a firm double fold in two places, — which causes you to see the two arteries which are in the temples.</end_of_turn
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And immediately put in the place where there are two ligaments with space between them until it is healed all that is in it, and dissolve the apostema.</end_of_turn
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And thus administer treatment in which poor blood is engendered until the ligaments relax; and treat that which is inflamed conveniently until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is necessary to ligate a a vein section, then keep your hand there where the ligate is to be made, and introduce the needle without causing further damage to the area where your hand has been placed, and make that penetrate; and when you have made that penetrate, withdraw that from the other side, and then ligate the ligate with gut as I have said concerning the gut of two parts at two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	May be if you fear that you will pull out the thread, then introduce the thread with that needle without causing further damage to the area where the first needle pierced, and strengthen the knots in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the ligate in the middle of the area where it is, so that when it is seated there that which is ligated will be fixed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And thus place over the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and thus administer the treatment which is useful with lukewarm and inflamed parts until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter of the ligate which is caused by the twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus also occurs ligate in the skin and in the vein, and in the same way occurs ligate in the nerves when they are injured by percussion or by excessive work, and in a similar way.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is more useful in the places of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where the joints are swollen
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a grievous ligate, and is similar in color to the rest of the body, and is in the greatest part of its course accompanied by great pain, sitting in the midst of the patient resembling stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a common ligate in the precordial region of the body, and therefore leave the cord in place, and do not touch anything more widely than is necessary and do not reach forward or backward
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore concerning those which are in the joints, do not allow that they should be squeezed with iron, because that would cause greater pain.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And that which is in the head or in the front of the cord tighten the cord with a pad.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	And if it is little ligate, then keep that which is above the forcepts and cut away that which is from the root of the cause
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then keep it suspended with a bandage, and excoriate that, and then ligate that; and suture the wound with gut, and treat that until it is healed
Capitol .li.	Chapter end.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of the ligate which occurs from the heel that occurs to the belly
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Then towards the buttocks of those who have seen many wounds in the belly of those and in the other parts of the body of those who are affected by fungal affections like those which are in the fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head is bulky; and already the lips of those are withered, and is of those which is small, and is of those which is not remarkable
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one of these, and in the belly of it were two patients who were like fungi resembling each other, and there was no difference between those which are white, of little root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were wrinkled and split, and moisture ran from that all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I instructed them and bathed one in the foot that was not so bad. and the other one that was like a wound in the foot
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And as for the operation concerning the incision of them, you must consider if the patient is moist, and if the color of their nails is white, moist, of subtle root; then you must ligate with a pad at the side of the thumb, and while you are there make a cautery in the fire, because the matter which must be expelled from the wound must be expelled without leaving a wound; and if you must leave it clean, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if sometimes the patient is pale and fearful, do not make the incision with an iron; but keep the needle firm of late make a point, and strengthen that nail; the manner of which is that which we have said; and leave that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And thus tighten the gut of the nail; therefore do not stop strengthening the nail greatly until it is detached and comes out by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if it is of great root, then there is some cause of fear and pain in the incision, and especially in that which is in the belly
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	May be it is possible that you will dissect the great toe, and then cauterize that part so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And take care of that which remains until the wound is healed
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to dissect that which is of fatty color, of little sensation, of little regard, for that which is abscess is cancer.</start_of_turn>
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I remember that you must remember this thing immediately.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .lii.	End of text.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	From the care of the great physician of the belly.</start_of_turn>
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The great physician of the belly is useful for many causes; or for fissures of the liver which are above the belly, and which is why you should remove the cloth or intestine according as it is in the other ruptures; or for healing which flows from veins or arteries as is said above, or for cramps caused by excessive air in the belly.</start_of_turn
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is for a fissure of the liver and for vomiting of the cloth, know that the color of the vomit is similar to the color of the body; and that it is painful, and that it appears in various situations.</start_of_turn
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the discharge of the intestine, know that the situation of that which we have recounted is of many various kinds, as you have already said that which is hidden is said to be occult; and that you must return it; and it is very painful for it, and is much lamented by much of the people.</start_of_turn
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is for humidity, know that it is not occult when you place your hand over it, nor is it constricted, nor is it swollen.</start_of_turn
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for healing, know that at this time the vomit appears black declining.</start_of_turn
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is for nothing, know that the vomit is difficult, thick and rough, and is fixed according to a quantity.</start_of_turn
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is for excessive air, know that it causes discomfort.</start_of_turn
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you must consider that if the great physician of the belly is for the healing of a wound of an artery or of a vein, or for excessive air; you must abstain from the care of the belly, because in this case there is fear and danger just as I have said concerning the vomiting of blood and of pus.</start_of_turn
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the great physician of the belly is for the intestine or for the cloth, know that you must command the patient to lie down and extend; and that you must place your hand around the circumference of the entire belly, and command him to stay between your legs on either side; and that you must surround the belly with a sponge of lint around the area which you have mentioned concerning the vomit; and that you must stretch the great toe towards the buttocks as much as a great hand; and that you must tie in the circumference with a strong thread or a needle and thread.</start_of_turn
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And you must take hold of the great toe which is extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that place and say that you will extract the intestine; and if you have not grasped it or held it for the ligament, know that you must extract it by force and push the intestine into the parts of the belly.</start_of_turn
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, know that you must take hold of that with one hand; and cauterize the superfluous parts of it.</start_of_turn
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your vein or artery, know that you must surround that place with a bandage, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and make two holes firmly in those two fields and insert two needles into the circumference which you have made around the vomit in the manner of a cross, which will pass through; and then strengthen the vomit in four parts over the needles.</start_of_turn
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and rest until the extended limb has fallen down by itself; or cauterize that when it is subtle and has fallen, and take care of that which covers the intestines until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the great physician of the belly is for nothing in it or for humidity, know that you must compress the vomit as we have said and extract the wound or the humidity which you find in it, and take care of that which covers and consolidates the area.</start_of_turn
Capitol .liii.	End of book.</start_of_turn
De curacio de cranc.	Book of treatment for cancer.</start_of_turn
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division about the kinds of cancer and how it is to be treated with medicine, and that it is dangerous in it the treatment with iron so that it is not ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is engendered in the great toe and the caution in the treatment of it.</start_of_turn
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	They say that certain vegetables cause swelling in the groin which is impossible to eradicate, just as it is with those which are in the breasts or in the thighs and in their limbs.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and fat, it does not matter that you take care of it, for I have never seen it healed by any remedy or that it has been overcome by anything.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation for it is when it is allotted as we have said, that you precede and lay aside the patient and purge from the bowels black several vegetables, and then sprinkle on that, if it is found to be replaced with something visible
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient as for the operation in which he is located, and prevent in the wound the needles which cover that; and incline from all parts of the body towards the codena, so that no cause remains of the reasons of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Leave running the blood, and do not bind that urgently, express the wounds, and withdraw the fat blood with your hand or with an instrument.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When it makes you angry the great bleeding of a vein or an artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood is stopped, and then care for that as for the other care within that it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	End of Document
De curacio de ydropici.	Chapter 3.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned in the division the species of hydrophobia of water, and their signs, and the treatment for them with medicines
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and is not approached with iron to the species of timpanists or to the species of yposarcha, for that is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of hydrophobia of timpanists with medicines and do not relieve the pain, then consider that if the patient has already achieved complete freedom from pain, or is affected by another disease, as if it were in his throat or belly and resembling those, do not give him iron, for fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if sometimes the patient is tormented by excessive vomiting, and there is no other disease but pure hydrophobia alone, neither young nor old, then the manner of the operation for it is that you hold the patient between your thighs, and express his belly with your hand, filling the water to the level of the fifth finger, and take sponges according to this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	both in two parts acute long, with an acute extremity thus as sponge; however, do this gradually in small amounts, so that in the operation there is no passage into the belly, and that you leave that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of hydrophobia is from the bowels, for in that case you must remove from the navel to the amount of three fingers beyond the fifth.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydrophobia is from the disease of the spleen, then your incision should be to the left of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of it is for the liver, then your incision should be in the back
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your incision be over the rib where the patient wants to vomit, for fear of breaking the blood vessels there
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And pierce with the instrument all around the navel, and enter into that incision, and raise your hand with the sponge between the navel and the stomach, and you will expel that; and if the amount of an eyelash or more comes out
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And pierce the stomach until the sponge reaches the place where the water is
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lead, to which in the lower part is a small hole, and on the sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is finished with the blunt end like a pen, as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it there is an arm, which when the instrument reaches the water, immediately stops over the instrument, thus evacuating half the amount of water in the meantime, for if you evacuate less than that in an hour, that will mean that the patient has died from the resolution of the vital spirit or from the approach of death itself.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate thus according to the quantity of the vomit and according to what you understand from the patient's disposition concerning the sickness of the vomit and the hardness of his bowels
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then extract the instrument, and retain the water that causes it, for the cord that retains it is over the sac from which it is recommended that you perform this in the same manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then repeat the instrument several times if the patient tolerates it, extract a small amount of water, and do so for several days in fear, and guard yourself from error until the water remains only a little
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	However, if you fear the patient, and you see a great amount of water, then let it dry up in warm sand, sprinkle it with bath, and wait in the sun for a long time; and care for that which has been given drying medicines until it is healed
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the belly and the flank, close to the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	End of text.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the care of children who have not yet opened their urine bladders.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some mothers of children do not pierce the head of the mixture (or it is pierced too straight or not at the right place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore cover the child as much as possible so that it is born with a little spur as in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And immediately stop the flow of the mixture with a plump plum clamp and tie it, and do so for three days or for four days
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When he wants to urinate, let him urinate freely; and then return that
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not clamp it, it is possible that the urine that goes over the place will not reach this clamp
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	However, if the flow that comes from the bladder is straight, it must be treated with a plum clamp, as we have said, for three days until it is strengthened
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	However, those in whom the flow is not in the right place, that is to say, the cause of which is that the opening of the bladder is too low, must elevate the bladder with their hand to the parts below; and this is not a natural production, because the sperm cannot reach the woman according to the rule, and is a bad disease for women
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The manner of performing the operation for them is that the patient be placed over the two hips, and extend the head of the bladder with your left hand with great extraction, and pierce the head of the bladder at the navel with a needle as if with a pen, or that you do not tear away any part, so that the semen comes out like the head of the bladder and the flow falls into the right place as you cover it.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And take care that in your operation for the flow of urine, that no other wound occurs; and stop when you see the bleeding stop, and care for the wound until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .lvi.	End of text.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the swelling which occurs in the prepuce on the head of the bladder, and of corruption, and blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the bladder.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many mothers observe that this swelling occurs in the bladder and is a sign of a bad wound
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those one is malignant and the other is not malignant
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, because you suspend with a single suture and close that when it is whole; and immediately place over that ulcer submerged in Egyptian unguent; and do so until that has healed
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malignant, of dark color, then you must administer pointed cautery near the incision and the ratio of that.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	However, if the swelling is in the prepuce at the head of the bladder and is not circumcised, and a part of the swelling is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then you must take care that the swelling which is inside remains until it is consolidated; and care for that which is outside, because when you have cured that, since you have cured that which is inside, it is not certain that the prepuce will not be torn
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it is seen often in the genitals and in the prepuce blackness and corruption, where you must take care that you remove everything that is already decayed and that is already corrupted or that is already corrupted; and immediately apply over that whatever is better, which is composed of fine flour of millet and of fine blood-clots and fragments of hair.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And take care of that which is left over until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May be if there is an influx of blood, then administer the lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	When the lunar cautery is to be used twice, as for blood-letting and for purges when they are corrupted.</end_of_turn>
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the bladder is burst and is destroyed in an hour, then insert into the meat of the prepuce a a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through that.</end_of_turn>
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the prepuce to the head of the bladder (and this adherence does not happen except in the case of those from whom the prepuce is naturally detached, and over them circumcision is not required; and when it happens from purges or from edema) it is necessary to remove the spicate substance from the area until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the bladder is completely freed.</end_of_turn
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove them [the spicate substances] entirely, then you must remove the spicate substance from the area of the head of the bladder and the prepuce, and aid in this that when the prepuce is soft, when strong it is perforated for its softness excessively.</end_of_turn
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the bladder with a strip of linen, which is already wet in the cold water so that it does not adhere to any other part.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply some astringent with two fingers until it is solidified.</end_turn><end_turn>
Capitol .lvii.	End of treatment.</end_turn>
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Regarding the circumcision of children and the care of those who have undergone circumcision.</end_turn><end_turn>
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to all ailments as are other diseases: however, just as in any other operation and will, and especially in children, it is necessary to assign in this better operation and way more light any possible loss of life.</end_turn><end_turn
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision in any of the free times, because they did not find it in their laws, and it is only because we have learned through experience that the majority of artisans and barbers use to circumcise and to mend using new and curious methods; and they use thread and needle for ligature and needle for suture.</end_turn><end_turn
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I myself have tried all these methods and I have not found a better method than the one with forceps, thread and needle which, when applied to circumcision as to the nail, causes the cord to be expelled more easily, because the cord of the prepuce is split into two tunics, and the tension is left below, and when strong it is forced to another incision and pain is certain.</end_turn><end_turn
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in circumcision which is performed for almsgiving, and which is digital, of which use the cobblers, it is not followed the incision of the extremity of the member viril, because when strong it enters into the tract of the latter.</end_turn><end_turn
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	However, in the operation with the needle, when strong it breaks through flesh and corrupts your operation.</end_turn><end_turn
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and often these women do not apply themselves in this way that it does not require circumcision, and I have seen it.</end_turn><end_turn
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Therefore, from the circumcision made with forceps and thread and needle, the benefit, experiment tells me, is that the forceps are in proportion to the incision, because the pain that is above is just as great as the pain that is below; and therefore as you press your hand in proportion to the two pains, and you insert according to a comparison in a time; and it is useful to compress the thread with a figure containing the cord of the bladder entirely, to which there is no error of any kind.</end_turn><end_turn
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you must make the child groan if he is of those who understand little, do not make him groan but simply tie the thread in his scrotum alone, and that you watch that he does not die before tomorrow.</end_turn><end_turn
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And in this way do those who are able to receive his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And do that you are between your most statuesque preparations, and do not be sleepy; and hide the forceps in your hand or leave them in his foot, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.</end_turn><end_turn
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then put your hand on the scrotum and blow on the cord, and pull that until the head of the scrotum is released, and then mend that which is added to it by the pus.</end_turn><end_turn
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the area marked with thread with a double knot, and then tie some more below of that a little bit by thread, and finally put your thumb and index finger on the area of the ligament behind and indicate that you have placed the knot properly, and insert between two ligatures.</end_turn><end_turn
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And thus raise the knee slightly and extract the hair; and then read the pulse rapidly, for it is better; and stop the powder from coming out and over the powder put on the place where there is moisture of humors concentrated with olive oil recently burned; and leave that on until tomorrow; and care for that until it is healed.</li>
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The way of the forceps at modification, this is the way:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	One is wide and the other is narrow, so that it does not go beyond the nail, and the length of the two acute angles is as long as two thumbs together.</li
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	Greater is the error in modification when it forces the intrinsic knee outwards, or parts from it the incision.</li
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore you must extend the one from your hand towards your nail facing the apostema of the limb and that you make the incision according to equality.</li
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it at your nail, then extract it at the nail and make the incision there.</li
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Greater if three days have passed, and it remains swollen, leave the dressing on; when the callous boils down, then read what is inside that it is released, and extract that which facilitates it, and make that one as it is prepared.</li
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And take care of the head of the limb, because it will not suffer from it.</li
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore care for that in which the wound consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.</li
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if the knee is incised in measure, and you obey its parts, then you will not notice it.</li
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And greater care for that in which we have said that it should be healed.</li>
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.</li
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the care of retained urine in the bladder.</li>
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by fullness due to stones or sand, or for poverty or meat, and it is similar to those we have said about the methods of care in the division.</li
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it to be due to stones that are already in the bottom of the bladder, then you must encourage the patient to walk over heels.</li
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And thus place the foot of the patient over the heel of the two feet and extend the heel of the foot from the two feet as much as possible, and the patient should strain as much as possible.</li
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore when the bottom of the bladder is strained, the stone is driven out to the back parts, because the urine is expelled.</li
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, it is useful to know the cause of the patient, for then you must administer extraction from it with an instrument which is called a siringua, which is like a silver or lead lion claw, with a tube of lead with a length equal to that of a palm and a half, to which there is a tube of lead at the head of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way of extracting the urine from it is that you grasp the tube doubled and tie it at the end of the hair or root for good support; and insert the ends of the tube into the part beyond the siringua, and prick with the forceps if there is any cause of the hair, but without introducing it into the tube with violence. And then increase the siringua around the border and with an egg of oil.</li
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And do the patient lie on the side, and bandage the bladder from it and the limb with oil of ravens, olive oil and vinegar.</li
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And thus remove the siringua easily when it has reached the level of the limb; and then bend the limb back from the navel; and then pull the siringua out again; and then put the hand into the bladder, and the patient will be relieved of the cause of the pain, and it is not useful to order otherwise, but only the meat in which there is discomfort.</li
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And slowly pull out the tube with the hair little by little, so that the urine follows the hair.</li
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And extract it and do the care of the urine, and use the siringua, do not do anything else, and use the siringua until the bladder is evacuated and the patient is relieved of the pain.</li
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.</li
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of irrigation of the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments which are in agreement with what has been said.</li
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or is surrounded by gravel, or is obstructed by stones, and you wish to drain water and medicines from that, then it is necessary to use a clamp to hold that.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	However, if the stone is silent in its passage, then it is closed.</end_of_turn>
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that case there are three tracts: two from one side, thus as many times.</end_of_turn
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is liquid, in which that which is peeled is immersed, and as much as it is pressed, its addition is within it, until when any cause is overcome by that which is expelled from the humors, whether it is expelled, and when it is expelled long, as much as the clamp which is held by naphta in the battles of the sea.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to expel humors from the bladder, insert the clamp into the humoral mass, and expel that water which is immersed in those parts, because the humoral mass is expelled from the concavity of the clamp.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And insert the clamp into the area according to what we have recommended in the ringing; and expel the humoral mass with water, because that humoral mass remains in the bladder in that way, and the patient is cured of that.</end_of_turn>
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	This is the shape of the subtle cry of the one whose bladder is crystallized, and that is the shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether of silver or gold, from which neither hand can make anything resembling a small pen, and leave it hanging without touching it.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in hand, and suspend the humoral mass that you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie that between two strong ligatures made of firm thread, and scald that humoral mass over the fire.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And insert the clamp into the area.</end_of_turn
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And place your hand over the bladder with the humoral mass stretching downwards until the patient feels that that humoral mass has already reached the bladder.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	Even if there is no bladder present, when you take hold of a bundle of rags and make a circle from that; and pierce that through its entire roundness; and insert the faithful thread firmly into those tracts, even if they are revolting; and join the circle so that it is joined like alum, because you pause in that water from which you wish to expel the humors, and smell and water.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then join that one on the instrument and make like that which has been made with the bladder, and express from your hand until the humoral mass reaches the bladder.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lx.	The end.
De extraccio de peyra.	From the extraction of stones.</end_of_turn>
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the species of stones and their care with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the phlegmas and stones generated in the bladder, and we remind you of that.</end_of_turn
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said the stone in which the cat operates with the hand, and section.</end_of_turn
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone which is generated in the bladder itself is that which is fixed in the bladder.</end_of_turn
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And thus we have narrated that which is the exhibition and abbreviation.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the stone which is generated in the greater bladder mostly appears in childhood; and concerning its signs, the urine which is emitted from the bladder is similar to water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient has frequent pain in their groin, and dark spots appear in the urine; and it is dressed in that way; and in that water there is often seen to be clotted blood.</end_of_turn
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is strange the healing of the children of that so that they have reached thirteen years; and the treatment is difficult in the old.</end_of_turn
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More so in the young because it is between these.</end_of_turn
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that of which the stone is greater and the treatment is easier; and if it is little, it is contrary to that.</end_of_turn
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we reach the treatment of that, cover at the beginning of that which modifies the patient's pain in the groin which extracts all the wound that is in the groin; for that wound many clots prevent the poisoning of the stone by the inquiry of them.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then be present the patient's pain in the groin and count and massage the thighs for so that the stone descends into the belly of the bladder, or that it jumps out of place and some clots appear.</end_of_turn
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And thus do that which is most ready among your hands, and the most of them are left in charge of their things, so that the bladder is entirely emptied downwards towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And thus do that which is most ready among your hands, and the most of them are left in charge of their things
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then do so to such an extent that you cover it all around with incision over it
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel it entirely let him touch it slightly, for it is to be said that if the patient is a child, you say "left hand" and if he is an adult you say "half", and put that into his belly button
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And thus do that the stone be left outside him
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little one little by little into the belly of the bladder
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And thus do that which is in that place that you have mentioned, and expel that towards the outside of the body where you saw the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to hold the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the thighs to the outside with his right hand, and with his left hand support the pubic bone which is left behind the thighs, at the part where the incision is made
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus do that the spleen be spontaneously expelled of which this is the form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and split it in it where it is between the hip bone and the thigh bones, not in the middle part, from the lateral side of the left thigh; and let the incision be over that stone and the hand be said to be either in the hip or in the groin, and let the incision be a transverse one, for the incision outside should be wide and not narrow according to the quantity of what comes out of the stone is to them possible, and not more, than that which can be comfortably grasped by the hand which is in the groin with the stone against the incision.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that of the stone there is some that has an angle and margins, for that its evacuation is difficult for it.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that which is like a lion's mane, and is round, and is difficult for it to evacuate
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if it is that which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not easily evacuated, then do so that you cover over that with your hand, or that you grasp it firmly with your hand over the stone, and do not remove it from it; or that you insert your instrument under the limb.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Or if you are not able to do that, then do so that you increase the traction a little, and if you see a flow of urine, cut through that which is sharp.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Or if the stone is greater than one, then do so at the beginning of the operation you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and do so that you strike over it; and do so that you press a little bit of urine; and do the same if there are more stones of two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	Or if the stone is large, it is known that you make a large incision, for that causes the patient two evils: or that it remains or that it continues to discharge urine, because the place is not completely consolidated
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Or give evacuation to it until it is expelled, or reduce in the fracture of it with forceps until you extract that in pieces
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	And when you have completed your operation, then do so that you fill the wound with lint of aloe and bandages of silk, and grasp that firmly
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And keep it covered with oil and vinegar, or with oiled gauze and vinegar, so that the wound should be softened
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And keep the patient lying down on the bed, and do not remove the dressing until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is gone, bathe the place with water and oil, and take care of that which is to be given on the next day and on the next day until it is healed
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Or if in the wound there occurs postoperative inflammation, adhesion and swelling, and that because the urine is prohibited (and that is known for the escape of urine with the urine), then insert the hand again into the wound and extract that urine, for if it remains it causes the bladder to become corrupted and putrefied
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And do so that you wash the wound with wine, water and salt, and against all spices, against everything that might impede its healing until it is healed
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the care in these times that you lie both thighs together and adjust the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the groin, and is fixed there, and there is an aversion to urination, it is customarily cured by cutting; for this treatment is accused of cutting; and indeed I have seen it done thus; and I command you to take a needle of iron, of which this is the form: ...
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	... triangular, extended, acute, fixed in flesh
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And immediately take hold, and lie against that groin so that the stone does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And immediately insert the iron into the groin, perforating easily so that the needle comes out to that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the needle in your hand over that small stone, and you will perforate the stone until you have pierced through; for the urine will flow freely then
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And immediately place your hand over that which is above the stone that has fallen out of the groin, which is drunk, and is full of urine, and the patient is healed
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Maybe if this treatment does not seem suitable for any cause that you prohibit, lie down a thread so that the stone remains, and another thread to pull out the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And immediately cauterize over the stone in that groin between two threads
E aprop extratz aquela.	And immediately pull out the stone.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And immediately loosen the threads and bandage the wound with oil, which is useful in the disease.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to leave a thread to hold the stone, but only that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread to pull out, for when the thread is loosened up the stone comes out and the pain ceases.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason when you pull out the thread, elevate the limb above the wound, or that it returns to its place, and the pain will cease as we have said
Capitol .lxi.	End of text.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the extraction of a stone from the thighs.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in the thighs is rarely engendered
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if you see a stone in any of these, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by skilled doctors
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the strong limb is verges.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the other is that you do not find the limb bent, as if it had been cast by the doctor when it was whole, or that it is from a limb that has had a fracture
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find the limb well known, especially the operation with the hand
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in the thighs is far from the location of the stone, for fear of causing swelling, and in that there is danger
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if you must do it, cover that you take a large limb well known, and that it is not easily found
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are lacking these, cover that you bring a large maid or a mistress of the house, or a noble lady who has had her limb amputated in this area, or a woman who has had a fracture in this area
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore do that which I command you, and order her to do everything that I command you, from the inquiry about the stone from the beginning; for it is necessary to know if the limb is verges, for I want the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you find it, cover that of leaves said, and I command you to order her to make the incision over that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not verges, I command the mistress to put her hand over the area of the wound and over the stone, since she should place her left hand over the bladder, and press that over well understood
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if you find it, cover that gradually move that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts beyond until it reaches the level of the cushion
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And immediately make the incision over that position of the palm of the hand where the cushion has been placed and hold the stone in that place, so that its hand does not slip from the stone
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The section should be small at the beginning; then interpose the needle over that section, and if you feel the stone, adjust the section according to the quantity you know the stone will yield from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You know that the species of stone are various: some are small and great, some are rough and sharp, some are long and round, and some have ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species there are of these for which you sign about what you want.</start_of_turn>
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flowing, adjust the wet thread tightly for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your work until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make ready all your instruments which are needed for extracting a stone in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your work.</start_of_turn>
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see blood flowing, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is blind, then you should stop the bleeding by pressing over the area and opening the wound slightly, and do not proceed further; leave the stone and do not extract it, for it will cause the patient's death.</start_of_turn>
E aprop cura la plagua.	And take care of the wound.</start_of_turn>
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the pain of the blood has subsided somewhat after a few days, and the wound has healed, then you can return to your work until the stone is expelled.</start_of_turn
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.</start_of_turn>
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for an abdominal hernia.</start_of_turn
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An abdominal hernia is nothing other than the accumulation of moisture in the white sac which contains the intestines, and is called a hernia.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes the veins are in the proper panicol which nature has prepared in the belly part of the fluid, until it is known that there is already another fluid; and that is the cord of the genetia between the white sac which we have mentioned, and it is not blood but pus.</start_of_turn
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to weakness in the ligaments that join the intestines, because in these some of this matter is deposited; and sometimes it happens by a violent blow that is inflicted on the intestines.</start_of_turn
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has various colors, for its color may be like lemon or blood-red, or even black feculent, or it may be clear and white, and this is the best.</start_of_turn
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs by which one knows that this accumulation of moisture is in the white sac that we have mentioned are: for when it is in that sac, the swelling gradually decreases in length somewhat like a figure of a fish, and the intestines protrude, because the moisture contains all around them.</start_of_turn
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper vein, then the swelling gradually decreases from the belly part and thus it is believed that there is already another fluid.</start_of_turn
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cord of the genetia and the white sac, then we must leave it alone.</start_of_turn
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then you should uncover the color of the moisture in the swelling while cutting away what precedes the form; and according to what is left in the residue, judge what it contains.</start_of_turn
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of it, we must command the patient to be flexible if it is possible, and sometimes to lie down flat.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And put a little cushion under the hips on both sides for any reason, and stop leaving them moving around with a cloth.</start_of_turn
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And place yourself on the left side of them, and command the minister to follow on the right side of them, who should extend his hand to the groin and the belly part.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a pair of scissors and make an incision through the cord of the genetia from the navel to the groin along the ribs.</start_of_turn
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made with accuracy, equidistant from the line that should be drawn on the skin of the genetia, until it reaches the white sac encompassing it.</start_of_turn
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And remove that, and observe, and take care so that you do not injure the intestines; and the discharge which you will see from the incision will be somewhat bloody and viscous according to the quantity that is possible.</start_of_turn
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between two layers of the limb with a saw, and extend the foot to its parts below; do not touch the sensitive area of the groin, and pierce the foot in that manner that is convenient to you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And pierce it entirely or in pieces, and more importantly with a subtle saw, for if you do not strictly observe the incision of the wound, it is not safe that the water will not return
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	More if in the course of this treatment of your groin in the hour of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the foot, return that again, and then suture together the two layers of the groin with sutures, and take care of this as well as the rest of the wound, until it is healed
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the swelling corrupted by another disease, then know that you must ligate the vessels that are causing the swelling, and extract the water, and take care of this as we have said before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	More if the water is added in two parts is enough, know that these are hernias; therefore pierce that part as you have done with the other swelling; and if it is up to you to do so, do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then take away the dirty clothes, and enter into the sections of the wound submerged in oil or scented oil; and stop the bleeding of another bandage which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over two thighs and the belly; and stop over layers of cloth doubled and powder, and tie those over as it is in this manner:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and take two cloths and fill them with coarse wool according to this fashion; and tie the extremities with which it is customary to cover the knee or with wet wool, and add them to the structure in the groin of the thighs, and one of the extremities will go into the groin of the buttocks and the other to the part of the ankle, and two extremities over two toes and two others over two knuckles, and all the tightening should be adjusted in the groin of the thighs.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And every other hernia of this kind is treated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and it is that you take a pointed cautery and insert it into the groin of the genitals, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white sac containing the water is discovered, and then you take away the cautery in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that sac, and it is ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the foot with a saw, and burn with a saw, and burn with pointed cautery; and pierce that as it is convenient to you until you have eradicated everything; and take care that the fire does not touch you
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Know that this operation is more safe and lasting than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	More if after the saw or the cautery, or the flux of blood, you find any other opposition, know that you must care for what causes you pain with care, as you are accustomed to doing for them.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	More if the ailment is slight, and you do not hope for a second operation for its horror, know that you must perform the perforation as we have recommended; and it is when it is confirmed that you must do so, for that which we have said concerning the significances, that the hernia is harmless.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Know that you must keep the ailment over any high swelling, and then pierce the swelling in the lower part of it at the level of the heel, and stop the perforation according to the length of the limb.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the perforation be wide enough to drain out all the water
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place over the area the heel and tie that and leave that, so that the water remains drained out
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care of that until the wound is healed
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	More if at the emptying of the water at that moment you pierce that: and that is not useful except for that in which the white puss in the orifice of the wound causes opposition and prevents the escape of the water, know that you must put in the wound a little or some instrument with which to extract the water from the abscess, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the oppression of the wound a little bit of something.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is added about six months or in the spring of those; and when it is added, know that it must be perforated in that same manner, for the ailment will be passed over in those seven days
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol .lxiii.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Capital .lxiii.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Wise men say that in the section concerning this hernia there is fear of loss of consciousness in the greater parts; for I see its remission and its saving by that means.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in that and the herbs of the apostemas
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore I say that the apostemas arise in the bodies in which the genetius are composed and is caused by various causes: or for sudden excess of blood, which is spread on the genetius, or for percussion
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And its color is according to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and is a hard apostema
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the soft apostema is pale, of which the color is dark, and it does not swell to it
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And many physicians say that it is useful for the swelling of arteries and for the inflammation of those veins as soon as the memory of them is perceived, or for the inflammation of veins
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than that, that which is for the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the apostema when you compress that area in the belly which is called that; and do not touch that area
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than that, that which is useful for the inflammation of veins is not dispersed by any cause because of the compression of that which is said
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that concerning this species it is useful to make a section and about the other meats; and that you introduce the root of the genetius, and spread the hair of the parts downwards, and extract that from the white fat, and deliver the serum of the vessels, and ligate them, and introduce more serum than you deliver from all the parts of the hair
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the blood has already solidified in those meats, the hour covers that you extract the blood and introduce that
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adherence for any cause of the fat, or between those which are between the veins, the hour covers that you deliver all that adherence and introduce that by incision around.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	More than that, if it is born from meat in the place of the adherence which is behind, the hour covers that you introduce all that is of it, and extract the blood as we have said
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, the hour fills the wound with soft wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and take care of that at the other care which is to be done until it is healed
Capitol .lxiv.	Capital .lxiv
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the care of hernia that is of long standing.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	When it is enveloped by any covering similar to a sprout with the softening of the testicles, it is useful to exercise difficult movement and walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the care of this disease it is for fear of that which precedes the memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But we must say the operation in which the first appearances are fierce
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that you should place the patient on a high cushion; and spread the serum of the testicles to the lower parts; and introduce the root of the genetius to the belly which is called that between the veins; and have these other attendants that you wish, and extend those with violent extension
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And introduce with a sharp knife an acute incision across the belly of the vessels until they are discovered
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And extract from all parts as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And leave in those a needle with a double head, and ligate that at the first place where the pain occurred, and ligate that other vein at the back of them
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And introduce those in the middle of the body for an acute incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is added of the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And take care of the wound with the care of the other wounds in which you wish to cause the vessels to fall which support one of the two genetius, which is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	More than that, if all the veins are injured, the hour covers that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles are so weakened by the veins that they are private of all nourishment for the injury of the veins, and that they are established, or that they are weakened so that they are not useful for that.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Capital lxv.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The development of this hernia is by incision that proceeds over the abdomen from the flanks of the miracle of the belly, because having given way the bulges of that rupture to some of the bulges.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the spleen or of excess of them, and these two species happen for various causes: either percussion, or vomiting, or crying, or elevation of any harsh cause, or by remaining in some way.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is for extension of the spleen, is that it happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen immediately, and is accompanied by swelling within the belly so that the spleen compresses the intestine
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is for incision of the spleen, that at the beginning it makes acute pain immediately; and it is accompanied by swelling different from the usual, leaving the navel prominent, and that is because of the swelling of the intestine, and the body of the spleen to the parts beyond the spleen
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And every vein that is outside the belly is forgotten about for the intestine, and this hernia is called intestinal hernia
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some veins are caused by windiness, and some veins run in the belly wound, and here it is retained, and it is with this that great pain is caused, and some veins cause great pain especially when they are pressed
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the care of these species of this disease there is fear, for that one must avoid the danger in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the way of operating on this is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his hand to the parts below the circumference of his cavity if he obeys your order, and you should place a swab over the hernia between your thumbs, and elevate the legs of the patient
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And you should tighten the navel which is the navel of the testicles towards the parts below, and you should cut the navel of the testicles throughout its length; and you should tie in two knots at the ends of the incision as much as you wish to open the incision with these
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if it is possible for you according to the quantity that you are able to do that from that from which you must remove it will be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And you should wash that part which is left the navel of the testicles, until the white spleen of some part is discovered
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you will enter the intestine called in this way that you cut the testicles, in that which is between the white spleen which is left the navel of the urine, and between the spleen according, and you will remove everything that adheres to that part behind the urine
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And you should touch with your hand the navel of the testicles to the parts beyond, and with your left hand extend the white spleen towards your left hand, and elevate the urine towards the part of the incision; and you command the minister to extend the urine outwards and you will dissolve the adherence that is behind with a completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek among the intestines that there is no cause for the intestine being covered in the white spleen
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	May be if you find it in the belly you should leave it there
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And you take a needle in which is faithful thick make of six threads, and you enter that which you must leave behind the spleen, which is under the navel of the testicles, which is the incision; and you cut the extremities which emanate from the thread until they are four threads, and you tie together at the end of each of them in a knot; and you tie with that the spleen from which we have said that it is left under the navel of the testicles with strong thread of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And you will wrap the extremities of the threads and tie them together with strong thread until such a time as all the blood vessels that nourish those do not suffer any cause so that from here no inflammation occurs
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And you wait another vein ligament for as long as three fingers; and when you have left two veins leaving the spleen which is left the navel of the testicles as much as the greatness of the finger, and you cut all the rest according to the roundness, and you keep the urine.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And you cut in the part behind the navel of the testicles for the incision from which runs clean and healthy just as we have recommended when we said it.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And you administer soaked gauze in oil, and wait on the wound; and you administer the thread which we have recommended (and some veins the white spleen is cauterized, which we have said previously in fear of the flow of blood, because many veins happen to those) and you tie the thread until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, the hours of cold water should be drawn up, and pause over that which has fallen as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And in this way treat the wound with another dressing until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.</end_of_turn>
De hernia ventosa.	Of wind-caused hernia.</end_of_turn
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia nothing is to be seen that has been omitted from its treatment with iron.</end_of_turn
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And first say that it is useful in this hernia just as we have recommended in the hernia of the belly; that is to say that you must ligate the veins near the section over which you wish to facilitate the passage of the intestine; and then dry in the middle of the cavity around the abscess with that which surrounds it, until the veins are released.</end_of_turn
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.</end_of_turn
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that is useful in the ankles.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some veins outside the ankle may be ruptured as we have said, and examine the area.</end_of_turn
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give any cause for the swelling to the knee; and if you must, it is little; and return it in all its entirety.</end_of_turn
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if it is prolonged in time, adjust the fracture in the hip so that the swelling is removed from the hip; and do this because of the extension of the hip which is in the ankle as we have said, which causes the hip to be stretched, and therefore it is softened and the area is abscessed and examined.</end_of_turn
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment is like that which precedes the narration.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And many veins are cured with iron in this manner: that the patient lies over the heel of both feet between your hands, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses examined along the border according to the quantity of three fingers.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And tighten the white hip which is under the knee until it is uncovered.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And take the ray and place it over the prominent part of the hip, and press that on the side of the belly.</end_of_turn
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And tighten the two prominent parts on the edge of the hip, and adjust with a suture one to the other.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And extract the limb of the ray, and do not insert the hip at all, neither extend the foot, nor any other cause as I will tell you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And treat that as with the treatment of wounds, and when you have inserted the pins, soften that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the hip is contracted and is not adjusted for the prominence of the rupture.</end_of_turn
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And it is better in this place, because it is more likely to be healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.</end_of_turn
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the knee of the testicles.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many veins the knee of the testicles in old men are softened to help soften the flesh that is between those, and it is feared concerning them.</end_of_turn
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for him who is asked in the treatment of them to make the patient lie on his side, and expose the whole knee which is softened over the natural knee; and then that he adjust two lips with a suture.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, you can also ligate the excess of the softened knee with three stitches or four and with a firm suture.</end>
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of the other wounds until they are healed and the pins fall out.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.</end_of_turn
De castracio.	Of castration.</end_of_turn
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	It is known to us that castration is forbidden in our law, however I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except for two reasons, of which the first is that a physician should know how to cure it when he is questioned about it; and the other reason is that we often need to castrate other animals for our youth for those, as well as mares, oxen, pigs, and other animals like those.</end_of_turn
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Therefore I say that castration is caused in two ways: either by extrusion or by incision at the root.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of extrusion, the method is to cut off the animal in lukewarm water until the testicles become soft and limp and hang down.</end_turn>
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And take hold of them with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to be painful.</end_turn
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In the case of castration caused by incision and section, you must hold the animal and grasp the root of the testicles with your left hand.</end_turn
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then ligate the sperm sacs, and make an incision over each testicle with a section until two holes project outwards.</end_turn
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And immediately make an incision wherever there is any swelling.</end_turn>
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not neglect any cause of pain, but take care of the subtle pain that is over the vessels.</end_turn><end_turn>
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than extrusion, because extrusion causes pain in the testicles and the animal desires to mate.</end_turn>
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Take care of the wound until it is healed.</end_turn>
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.</end_turn>
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On Hermaphroditism Care.</end_turn>
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is in two ways: when there is a space between the testicles in the codena area, in which there is a figure like a woman in which the female parts are close together.</end_turn
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes there is a bladder of urine in the codena of the testicles.</end_turn
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women it is a kind: and it is that the clitoris of the woman is like two testicles of a man somewhat small and somewhat large at the root like that of a man and two testicles.</end_turn
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the care is of three kinds: two of the men and one of the women.</end_turn
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must cut away those flesh adjusted until it evacuates the mark of that, and take care of them with care like other wounds.</end_turn
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	As for the second kind of men in which there is urine in the codena of the testicles, there is neither care nor operation for them.</end_turn
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.</end_turn
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On Constipation and Excessively Large Flesh in Women.</end_turn
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Constipation is often caused by natural causes and is properly treated; and sometimes it is increased in some women just as in men and even during coitus.</end_turn
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore take hold of the excess of constipation with your hand or with a sponge and cut it away.</end_turn
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not hesitate in incision, especially on the edge of the uterus, so that you do not impede the flow of blood.</end_turn
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And take care of that like care for other wounds until it is healed.</end_turn
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More flesh is born than that which is in the horror of the mother until it fills up that space, and when it is great it is sent away to the parts like that of a dog (and for this reason it is called “intestinal disease”); therefore we must cut it away just as we cut away the constipation, and care for that until it is healed.</end_turn
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.</end_turn
De curacio de alratica.	On Care for Windpipe.</end_turn
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Windpipe is that of a woman that is not perforated, or that has a small hole.</end_turn
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental.</end_turn
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is for disease which has preceded it, or that is caused by nothing adjusted or by a subtle or thick wound.</end_turn
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is found in the groin, or on the sides, or in the fat surrounding the belly, or in the bottom of the belly, and it hinders walking, grasping and procreation, and it also hinders menstruation.</end_
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is useful for diagnosis, if the swelling is visible, it is enough; but if it is not visible, you must search for it among the ribs or in the belly.</end_turn
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you place over the two lips some powder, and then pause the veins which indicate that there are many.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be over the two buttocks, the buttocks spread out, and then extend the two lips with force until that subtle compression is broken and the swelling is opened
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take a cloth and soak it in oil and place it over that area, and keep it there until the area is softened.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the swelling is large and thick, then cover that with some wool or a piece of myrtle leaf
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the swelling is for meat, then suspend that with one hand, and cut that with the other hand.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And let the medicines be those that stop the flow of blood from the wound, such as vinegar, alum, and saffron, adjusted with oil of herbs.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And give her a broad needle of lead so that the wound is not solidified too much
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep that for a while and give her lukewarm water to drink.</start_of_turn>
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let it be cured with the other care of consolidation until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Many times these things happen in the greater part of childbirth of other meats, and it is necessary to cut them according to this manner.</start_of_turn>
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If there is an afterbirth of bones, do not attempt to break it in any way.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lxxiii.	(End of Document)</start_of_turn>
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the care of haemorrhoids, boils and red swelling that occur in the belly of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Haemorrhoids are recognized from the veins of the buttocks until the blood vessels are cut off continuously; and when they are ancient haemorrhoids and they are formed they become effective.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division these species of them and I have told you of those which receive care and of those which do not receive care.</start_of_turn>
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that haemorrhoids and boils when they are in the groin and do not appear to the feeling, it is not necessary to give them any care with the knife.</start_of_turn
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifice of the belly on which one feels something, those must be cared for.</start_of_turn
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And put the woman in a warm bath and then extend a thigh with the forceps or with rough hands, and cut them with the nails.</start_of_turn
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And sprinkle over those the fluxes of the blood of one of the vessels that is cut out its wound, like vinegar and similar to that.</start_of_turn
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And cover the lower limbs for an hour, and then stop that in cold water.</start_of_turn
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the blood flow persists, then make that decoction of alum, of gum, of urine and of similar things.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a paste with it on the two of them.</start_of_turn
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is clotted, it is bad; and if not, make it adhere to two cushions, and to the milk of sacrifice.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take a cloth and soak it in the juice of cocksfoot or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of plantain with some vinegar and make it adhere to the area; and care for the area until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	And if the wound is rough in regard, cover that so that you cut that according to what I have said in the previous paragraph.</start_of_turn
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lxxiv.	(End of Document)</start_of_turn
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of an abscess that occurs in the belly.</start_of_turn
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are various species of abscesses that occur in the belly, such as bone, abscesses that puncture and ulcerate, fatty abscesses and fistula haemorrhoidal, piles and fistula of other kinds.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken of these diseases and their signs and their treatment in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	I have already mentioned in this treatise the common cause of gout, which is the accumulation of stone in the joints, and if you wish to know how this operation is performed, I shall tell you.</end_turn>
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, if you consider that the pain of gout in the heel begins acutely with percussion and swelling and fever, and sometimes with swelling and if you touch that area, do not hesitate to perforate it, and care for that which will help promote healing until the acute symptoms subside.</end_turn>
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And therefore, you must make an incision over a painful area having two fingers; recline over the foot two cushions and adjust the patient's legs below the belly, and spread out the patient's buttocks, and place your hand over the area that causes pain, and hold tightly as required.</end_turn
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then call the midwife and bring the instruments that are required for this operation, for their form will be seen in those causes that make it necessary.</end_turn>
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Therefore, when you are about to administer this instrument, stay close to the opening of the heel, and do not let anything that comes out of the instrument be more than the opening of the heel and cause harm to the patient.</end_turn
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the opening of the heel, then you must cover the surface of the opening with powder to prevent any other instrument from entering the opening of the heel.</end_turn
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Therefore, you must hold the vein that runs in the instrument from below and the minister should hold the instrument and rotate the vein until the opening of the heel is reached.</end_turn
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the evacuation is completed, and it is grasped with the hand and is bloody and viscous, then you must cover that with a piece of cloth.</end_turn
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the healing is evacuated, then you must place a soaked wick in a bath of olive oil or green oil in the area, and hold the dressing in place in the opening of the heel.</end_turn
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And keep the heel still and over the wound apply a clean bandage soaked in water in which are boiled mallows.</end_turn
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And care for the wound for two days until it is healed, and give it something to drink until it is healed.</end_turn
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And many physicians wash the heel and the wound every day with water and vinegar, and give them something to drink with water in which there are boiled lilies or long pepper, and return to the drink.</end_turn
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the wound is deep in the heel and cannot be cured by force, then you must refrain from treating it with instruments, having cared for it as we have said in the division.</end_turn
Capitol .lxxv.	End of Document.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how to perform these procedures in cases where natural methods are not sufficient.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary because the midwife must first know the normal figure of childbirth in order to recognize the signs of abnormalities, and when the woman gives birth and desires to smell the air, and when she is distressed about what is above her and about her navel, it is because she is in an unnatural position.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, you must compress the abdomen so that the fetus is slightly flexed when it descends on the head, and is delivered with the second stage, and is protected from those excesses with good management.</end_turn
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Since that part is not natural and should not be used, for when the fetus comes out on its feet and the body of the fetus is in front of the head and the feet are under the head, and the hand or the foot touches the heel... ...or the head and the hand touch the heel, or the head is over the belly, and it turns into the position of the illegitimate figures.</end_turn
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in all these cases, and to guard against error and deception.</end_turn
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	I have shown you all the figures of these things, and what is their meaning so that you can understand and remember them.</end_turn
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus comes out on the head naturally and is violent on the woman, and is difficult for her, and sometimes the power of delivery is already exhausted, then you must do what the women have to do, and expel the fetus with fennel seed and fragrant oil.</end_turn
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until it descends the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Maybe if it does not descend, the hour covers that the woman is moistened with slime of peas and slime of fenugreek around the navel
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then order them to compress and clench that which must be expelled with force; and seal their mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus will be forgotten for a long time
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if two-thirds of the fetus have been forgotten from the beginning, the hour covers that you reduce them gradually little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Maybe if they do not obey the treatment, the hour pauses the woman on a stool and lifts their feet up, and then supports the stool on the ground; and the woman should be held that she does not fall from the concussion
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the greatest part is not taken away and the fetus dies, the hour records that and extracts the fetus from the belly or binds its body to the hand and extracts that which is equal, because that which is forgotten will be forgotten
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From this point on the embryo is about the thighs down.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on the thighs, the hour covers that you press them inward, and then make the fetus small, and that you fill that which is lacking, and that you grasp a foot of it and extend those little by little
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Maybe when they are like this within the cushions, the hour orders them to cry out, and make that they be expelled with force, for if God wills it, that which is forgotten will be forgotten
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten in that which we have reckoned, the hour returns the fetus little by little until it pauses that according to the natural figure, for that which is forgotten will be forgotten in the curiosity of this moment
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited in everything that we have reckoned, the hour takes from high musellage and sticky gum, and pierces all over the foot for good percussion, and then brings up the afterbirth from the belly of the woman, the fluid from the belly of the fetus
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that incision in water, until it reaches the navel cords.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when sometimes the parts leave them softened, the hour gives them a fumigation of marjoram and pauses that for them<end_turn>
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the fumigation has lasted for an hour, the hour orders that it be made on a stool, and then make that it be expelled and extract the mouth of it, and take that away, and press the lower part of the belly of it lightly, so that the fetus will be forgotten for a long time.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	From this point on the fetus is about the thighs down and its greatest parts.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus lies like this, the hour orders to bring in gradually their smaller parts; and that the woman should be supported on the hip over the thigh, and that the feet should be put in front, and those should be held on the sides, and fill up their parts.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press little by little on the belly of it, and then extract what is left of the feet from the navel until it is ready in the lower part.<end_turn>
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forgotten, the hour takes their feet and makes them move violently, and then press gently on that which is over the navel cords little by little until the fetus is expelled from the parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then bring in gradually their parts and fill up the fetus little by little, and order the woman to cry out until the fetus is forgotten
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	From this point on the fetus is latently hanging with one of its parts.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	You may attempt to reduce the hand, but if you are unable to do so, the hour raises the woman and lets her go down
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go down, the hour makes her sit on the side, and with great force shakes the cushions of her with concussion, and then administer to her the things which you gave her and the things which you recommended of mucilages
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if it is urgent to deliver, the hour orders that it be made on a stool, and then studies the reduction of the hand, and fills up the fetus according to the natural figure, and makes the woman expel and orders her to hug herself until she is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The foot is swollen, and the area around the ankle is two-thirds larger than normal.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the mistress has the foot in hand and slowly turns the little toe outwards, it is easier to do so
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is soft and when it is inflamed, and when you pause your hand over the heel where we have recommended oil and unguents.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command them to move their hand slowly, and when you see that it is done, command her to rest on a cushion and command her to incline her knee towards the outside, and command her to compress; and do this until the vomiting stops
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared to exit through the wide opening
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they suffer from horror of the mother in this way, consider it, and then you will find that the second one will depart with the moisture from the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended over the face and the ankle, then you must prick the navel, so that it is not retained and remains.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then pull the foot downwards as much as you can until it pauses, and command the woman to press against her chest several times, and when it is let go of, do not forget to look at the foot immediately, if it is God or no other
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or many feet
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Be wise that twins born from many veins are not born at the same time, and sometimes one or two are not born, for this is strange and should not be; for this is not from natural causes, but from the devil.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And tell them that whether they are multiplied once or twice, when they are separated by the navel cord, they distinguish those inside the ligament in the belly of the womb from those outside by the navel cord of those who remain. And every vein which is not delivered is forgotten just as if it were a foot for a natural birth, and so sits several veins for an unnatural birth like we have recommended
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, you must encourage them and persevere until we have mentioned the unnatural figures, then you will care for them just as we have recommended
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the mistress is subtle and does what is easy and subtle, and is prompt, and is ingenious according to all figures as she is prepared from the impending danger to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and is aborted
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some herbs are formed in greater ones, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and ten, and indeed I must verify that a woman who has had six miscarriages will not have ten, for this causes great pain according to the knowledge of the wise men.</end_of_turn>
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is because of the science of the mistress which is strong in that part where the child resembles the former, and therefore she must order that it be covered up so that it does not see it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXV
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the foot when it is dead
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead foot as we have said in the division of the medicine, and it is not expelled by force, and you must use an operation with care, considering whether the woman is of sound virtue and is not among those who are subject to the accidents for which she is feared to lose her life
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then you must cover the woman over the hips over the seat and lean her head back and lift her thighs.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister has two parts or is bound in the hip for so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the foot
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of the mistress with oil of olive and with a mixture of alum, fennel and seed of thyme.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then put your hand on the mistress’s hand with those oils and mixtures, and then interlace your hand in the heel, where the nails remain in the foot.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place conveniently where you consider that the foot is ready to come out, and when you have left the nails in the heel, or in the ankle, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the beard, or the tonsils, or in the armpits, or in the places proper of the buttocks, or leave the fatness
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the pain extends to the toes or the middle of the back, it is also called gout.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And so keep the thumb with the left hand, and stop the curvature of the foot at the place between the thumb and the little finger of the left hand, and enter your hand there easily and stay there until the cause of the pain has passed away.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And so stay there and hold another hand there, or a third if necessary, to prevent it from being pulled too much, and not only in a straight line.</end_of_turn
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And so be gentle all around, so that the sensation of the pain is relieved just as it is useful in the teeth when the cause of it is eradicated.</end_of_turn>
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And so it is necessary that the extension is softened there; and if any part of it is retained, the lady should put some of her fingers on their tips with oil and enter there and rotate them over those that are retained.</end_of_turn
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the foot is outside, their fingers will be exchanged among the places that are more painful; and do this until the whole foot is outside.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is outside before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that because of the stiffness of the foot, then cover it with a bandage; and extract that until the whole foot is outside, and insert that under the nail or at the junction of the thumb or at the ankle.</end_of_turn>
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so do the same with the other hand and the two feet.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the foot is large, or if it has been injured by the stiffness in the sensation, or if there is water adjusted in the head, then enter between the spines and split the head and extract the water, or drain it with an instrument called an “alundat”, which is of the same shape as the other instruments in the chest.</end_of_turn
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the foot is large by nature: and so insert that into the paste, or prevent that from being inserted as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.</end_of_turn
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is outside and is contracted behind the heel, then split it open until the humidity which is in the feet has disappeared.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, or does not obey this sensation, then insert your finger as much as possible into the head.</end_of_turn
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the belly is swollen or is in hydrops, then extract that until the humidity which is in it is expelled.</end_of_turn
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the foot is over the knees, the attraction of the foot is slight and the direction of the foot towards the mouth of the uterus is slight.</end_of_turn
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it is contracted behind the belly and the foot, then extract that which has enveloped your hand, and split the belly and the foot until the water which is in them has drained out.</end_of_turn
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are remaining and the head is back, the maid enters the left hand; if the mouth of the uterus is open, the maid puts the hand into the navel, grasps the head, and pulls that towards the belly, and at the same time enter one or two fingers into it and pull them out.</end_of_turn
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the uterus is closed by a swelling caused by an ulcer, do not stretch over it; just give an effusion of fatty humors.</end_of_turn
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Give compresses; and keep the patient in lukewarm water that mollifies and hydrates.</end_of_turn
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is over the knee joint, it is possible to do an agglutination: and to administer what has been said about the foot alive.</end_of_turn
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then insert it under the nails, and extract it.</end_of_turn
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not neglect any cause of the second kind.</end_of_turn>
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed all your work, then administer what has been said about the cure for the ulcers which occur in the uterus.</end_of_turn
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is an influx of urine, discharge in astringent waters and administer the other treatment.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema in le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent in las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec in tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses in la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is like a pair of forceps to which teeth are fastened at the extremity, thus as often as necessary, and some veins are made to flow long thus as often as necessary, to which teeth are fastened thus as often as necessary, like teeth that are fastened to a cushion to which is applied pressure.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of slight swelling:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a single swelling having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a single swelling having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which teeth are fastened at the end to which the head of the foot is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of swelling having two extremities to which the head is incisited:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide swellings:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercises, and when more of them are multiplied and prepared, the artificer must be more skilled, as it is more pleasant for the patient and more honorable for the doctor.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with these instruments in any way, for their necessity is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second [tooth].
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second [tooth] is retained, you must encourage it, so that the patient will expel the seed itself, and then command her to spit with condiment, and grasp her hand over her mouth and over her nose, and if by this means it is ejected, well and good
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, take an elixir and perforate the covering with a needle and place on that herb that has opened the mouth of the woman, thus as with cinnamon and rue and marjoram and chamomile and saffron and mastic and cassia lignea and Saint-John's-wort
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them will be submerged in water in the elixir, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And put a canula of gutta in the mouth of the woman, and keep that inside until the vapor comes out to the cavity of the woman
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And do that spit as we have said, and the second will be expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	More if you remain with this care and it does not come out, then command the matron to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in almond milk, and then mix that in the palm of the hand and touch with that the second [tooth], and when that has been found, then take hold of it and pull that slowly, for if the tooth is attached to the jaw, take hold of the hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second tooth, extract that little by little according to the rule so that the jaw is not left with the sharp impression.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Then cover that the right and left sides are at ease and without pain.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust that in the quantity of traction, for it will obey and avoid adhesion
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the woman is closed, as we have recommended, the care with the turning and the elixir with herbs
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	More if it does not come out by all the means we have recommended, then keep that you do not tire yourself out in the attempt of extraction, more however that what comes out of it to the mouth of the woman lies to the shame of the patient, and therefore order that that be praised with ointment and tetracycline; for that will make it disappear in a few days and will be expelled without fail.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	More when it becomes pale, there is a bad odor to the head and the stomach, and that leads to the patient; and therefore it is necessary that sub-fumiguous and convenient remedies be administered at that time.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	More of the ancients already use sub-fumigation with lead and dried figs
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated must be due to the retention of menstruation and the second [tooth].
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Either see or be aware.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And keep the small limb in the palm of the hand and the large limb over the fire, and the sub-fumigation over the sleeves of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that inside until that sub-fumigation is consumed and repeat it again
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Care of the buttocks of the unperforated child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The children cry out and their buttocks are not perforated, which already cause pain and swelling in the palm of the hand
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	The matron should be covered with a cushion while the doctor pierces the heel of the foot; and if so, pierce that same heel with a pointed instrument, taking care not to touch the nerve.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And immediately place your hand over the area affected by the swelling in wine and oil; and take care that the point is numb before proceeding further
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is swollen, then immediately insert a tube through the wound for several days, and leave it until the swelling has subsided
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	If it is necessary to consolidate the buttocks for the treatment of plague or swelling, then cover that consolidation so that it is not injured, and take care of it as has been said concerning treatment and ointment
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment for fistula that arise from the bowels.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that arise in the lower parts of the bowels are nodular and bulky, and arise from the large intestine or the space between the buttocks
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or swelling
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodulus is old and softened by the moist white or pale yellow moisture, and several herbs penetrate some of those fistulas, several penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known for their evacuation by vomiting and by flatulence; and several women use the patient's vomiting to evacuate them, and many times it is evacuated by those very worms
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the heel; and some penetrate into the space between the thighs and into the groin
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And it is known that a penetrating fistula that enters the buttocks is not painful, and that when it does not penetrate, it is with difficulty that it can be recognized or grasped in the fistula when it is painful.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If it is painful, then immediately enter and try to grasp the point with ointment or with a sponge, until you feel the point or the swelling in the buttocks
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if neither of these methods succeed in producing vomiting or worms or flatulence, as we have said, then it is known that it is not a penetrating fistula, and you should take care of the treatment
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates the bladder or the heel bone, it is significant of urine from that source and the prohibition of its evacuation until such time as the place is healed by medical treatment
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates the hip joint or the bone and causes pain in the limb, it is a sign that the point has penetrated here if not painful in the bone, and that there is pain in the limb; and that it is necessary to reduce the swelling in all these cases; and that it is not valid in this treatment, nor is it consolidated at once
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas, treatment is not enough, and the treatment of these is the toil and care of the doctors who have been ordered to do so
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in the one that is not penetrating and is not old, healing with iron is expected as I have recommended and as I have done previously
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between his thighs and raises his legs up to his chest, the thighs are inclined towards his belly, and immediately enter with a sponge or ointment if there is swelling in the fistula, until you feel that the point has gone numb
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If the patient groans from the pain in the buttocks, then immediately put your hand on the patient's buttocks
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the point has already penetrated without your having discovered it, or if you feel between the buttocks and the heel or the thigh, then it is undoubtedly that it has penetrated; and do not attempt anything in this case, for it is not in this treatment
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Indeed, sometimes a healthy person is also affected by these matters.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And as for the medication for which we hope to provide some help in this matter, it is that you burn the cautery sponge with the width of the fistula, as has been said before, and introduce that burn into the fistula until it reaches the buttocks; and immediately repeat this two or three times until you are sure that all the affected tissues of the fistula have been cauterized, which resemble little feathers of geese
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And take care of those who are wrapped in cloth so that they do not swell, and take care of those medicines that are generated and consolidate, and if it is healed, it is not; and if not, it is not healed at any other time by any other treatment
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the attempt enters and does not penetrate the belly of the thing that is in the groin, and between that and the attempt that is very clearly of marrow or cartilage, and sometimes the fistula in which the surface of the coccyx is cut, then dry the coccyx from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it dry on the attempt, and both in the fistula and outside it until the incision reaches the place where the extremity of the attempt is, and for the attempt is freed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And so ligate those carns that are fistulaed, which are put together like nails of pain and do not remain from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Maybe sometimes blood flows between you and your operation when you burn those carns, then it is better to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because the cautery with fire is better for large wounds: so is the adjustion of those carns that are adjusted, and excision of the blood exseccated of the humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And so care for those that are clad in cloth in border or in cause of distress within that place escapes the hand, and so care for the wound as long as there is a hard, engorged bone generating and consolidating
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And so medicines in which there is styptic action and excision; when the time has passed, it is already healed and you do not fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	However if the fistula has already passed into the belly of the groin and is elongated from its surface of the body, then enter the belly of the thing that is in the groin and inquire about that.</end_of_turn>
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you encounter the attempt and between you and her is clearly of cartilage or bone, and it is probable that it will penetrate, then it is not an operation in her but according to the way of faith and hope.</end_of_turn>
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Which cause is to administer in her in three ways: or that you cauterize that again as we have said; or that you drain that until you perceive the concavity of her so that it is possible for you to enter with some instruments and the cure be more effective; and do not proceed without slicing so that you do not injure the skin containing the bone, and that you take care of the patient as soon as possible, even if it is with the will of the sick; or that you lengthen that clearly and say that pus that you dry up that within towards the groin, as we have said, or with the attempt or another acute instrument, and so ligate those carns that are fistulaed that are in the incision towards the end; and so force you to restore the entire wound from the incision, and if the pus that comes out does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the groin, and if there is still pus in the wound, you will be more curious about the patient.</end_of_turn>
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you enter the attempt into the fistula, and it is at the flank of the groin surrounding the surface of the body with the coccyx and the margin of the groin, then the attempt tries to perforate the extremity, which is as if you were preparing the layers according to this method.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and enter in that faithful covering of hair or around those; and so enter the attempt with faith in the fistula until you perceive the concavity of her.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	However if it penetrates the margin of the groin properly do not tighten, then you will extract from that thread that tract as soon as you enter the belly of the thing that is in the groin; and you will extract the extremity of the thread and adjust the two extremities even, and close each one, and rest for a day or two, and when it has subsided again insert the thread into the bone, close that again until those carns are inserted between two extremities of the thread and that they press together.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And so care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	However if the sign of the fistula is not penetrating, then you must make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, but not in the belly, for that is not your concern, because you must not injure the skin; and so make that it is healed.</end_of_turn
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The way of spatum spinos concerning which the fistula is fissured: the curvature of which is not acute and the other part is not blunt, so that you must not injure anything that is not necessary, even as sometimes.</end_of_turn
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of suture of hemorrhoids in which runs blood in the incision of those.</end_of_turn
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, which either remain between the groin like those that are of cartilage, or which are like the seeds of barley.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those there are small and large ones, and that the blood runs from those of all those towards that one, and it is neither solid nor liquid, but rather like a paste, and that is outside the groin and in the extremities of it.</end_of_turn
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that is to order the patient to drink and expel until the urine becomes clear and the spots disappear from your eyes.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you wipe and suspend with a handkerchief or that you have those on your nails, and then you prick those with your needle.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If your nails do not hold up due to the humidity of them and their softening, then take them with rough or coarse or flaked lanolin, and extract them from the nails, and then prick them with your needle, and sprinkle over them some fine ashes as a protection, because they will adhere to these rather than to the wound; or cauterize them as it is described in the chapter on cautery
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And take care of them with other treatments until they are healed
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the urine does not obey evacuation, then order the patient to drink plenty of water in the bladder and that it be evacuated willingly when the patient expels it
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the spots are outside the urine, then their cause is slight, that is to say that you take those on your nails, or that you take those on your thumb, and instill them, and take care of them with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever has a wound, cover that you administer sutures according to this manner: take a silk thread and put it through a needle and then extract the spots from the upper parts, and make that penetrate through the needle in the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread in the part left behind the needle, and so horizontally; and tighten the wound firmly, and then remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do all of this, and do not touch them, so that the surplus of the healing runs from there
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And put a little oil of rosemary or cerate on the bladder; and put that on the bladder and order the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that for a while; and when it is evening, care for them with ointment or another treatment until they are healed
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistula.</start_of_turn>
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	The veins become swollen due to the excess of the wound or for the constriction of the nature.</start_of_turn>
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since these are ancient remedies and do not work in this medicine, cover those at the point of emission or on your nail until they are moist and host those pus pockets, which prevent them from solidifying; and take care of them until they are solidified.</start_of_turn
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must apply those with greater force than the first time until the wound is healed and is excoriated; and take care of them until they are healed.</start_of_turn
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	As for the treatment of the wound, this is key.</start_of_turn
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that the swelling of the limbs is key, and it is not without noticing red according to the color of the urine resembling a cap of clove, and it is useful in all parts of the body and especially in the lower parts of the feet and the buttocks, and because of these pains you must administer it.</start_of_turn
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cover that which is in the circumference of the key, and keep it with nails or thumb, and eradicate it from its root; and take care of that.</start_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	Or if you wish, cauterize them as it is described in the preceding chapter.</start_of_turn
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a verucca is a small, rough, round blister that appears on the surface of the body, and veins become swollen in the most of children.</start_of_turn
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for them is to stretch and instill that, or to tighten that with thread or hair until evening.</start_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	Or if you wish, cauterize them as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.</start_of_turn
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are eradicated both forward and backward with the instrument that I have mentioned.</start_of_turn
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a termite is a small, foul-smelling or large blister that appears on the surface of the body, and when it is touched again it is perceived as a bite of a termite, and is useful around the body.</start_of_turn
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	La forma de cristeri gran e pauc
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz
De curacio de las plaguas.	De curacio de las plaguas.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas les plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo les plaquas.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	The causes of sudden vomiting are various: from the rupture of a bladder or stone, incision of the space or ribcage, percussion on the flank, or from a burst or arrow wound, or similar to these latter causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The boils that are on the limbs are just like boils that occur on the head, or on the buttocks, or on the feet, or on the belly, or on the testicles, or similar to these latter.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	I also recommend the treatment of several boils to stop that reasoning and rule regarding the other boils
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the simple boils, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when there is a simple boil on the head and it is not a fracture, it is considered: if it is due to the bursting of a bladder or something similar, and if the codena has already been taken alone and the boil is great and there is fear of apostemata of the head, then you must immediately cover the area with a cautery and evacuate the abscess as much as possible; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the herb if no other cause forbids it, more so if the abscess that is ejected is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the evacuation be contrary to the part affected by the boil; and guard the patient from repletion and from drink and coarse food
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	And if from the little the cause forbids it, then let the diet be reduced and do not approach meat or drink.</start_of_turn>
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And rest over the boil, if there is an abscess of the cautery, smear with olive oil or in wine in which it is stipticated.</start_of_turn>
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are sure of the abscess of the cautery, then rest over the boil, if it is recent and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply in small quantity.</start_of_turn
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then rest over the poultice until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the boil is great or is due to an incision of the space or something similar, and the edges of the wound are not adjusted for pupils, then adjust them with a suture as I recommend for the suture of them.</start_of_turn
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the boil is already discovered from the bone and skin, and it is not retention but a small swelling, then prick it and apply medicines to the boil; restore the meat immediately after the codena, and command the patient to abstain from eating fatty foods: heads and fat meats and things that resemble them, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the codena and it does not adhere to the bone, then you prick everything that can be pricked and evacuate it, and apply treatment to it.</start_of_turn
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these boils there is an artery or vein from which blood flows, and which is not divided by medicines, then inquire about the artery; and if you find that it is not divided, then prick it with a needle, or ligate it; and if necessary you must cause that which we have said must not be eaten to be eaten, then cauterize it until the blood is divided.</start_of_turn
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these boils are simple and small, the cause of them is slight; in this case that you sprinkle upon them this powder, which, when solidified, will dry out those that have changed with the air.</start_of_turn
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take olive oil one part, of blood-resin two parts, of vinegar not extinct three parts; mix them all together and grind them, and let the boil be filled with it, and let it be tightly bound by a good constriction until it adheres, and let it be coagulated with the blood.</start_of_turn
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply those things with powder and read that, and do not remove it while it is still fresh, because it is not erased by the medicine until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And every vomit does only cause heat, when it is not at your presence oil and blood-resin.</start_of_turn
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this remedy has already been performed in great boils when it is necessary to suspend them on those and stretch them, and only for recent boils that have not altered their color.</start_of_turn
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if they have altered it, and especially when it is in summer, I do not understand the position of this powder, however, treat them with what we have said, in this way that you suspend the boils on the dressings or that you place them over the barley flour with water and honey until they are reduced; and apply the other treatment along with this until they are healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	May it be that if an accident occurs at the fracture of bones, even if it is slight, then you extract what is in the hand.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say that the cure for fractures of the head is in that which is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the bowels.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	May it be that if the plague occurs in the bowels, it is no different in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May it be that if the nerves of the bowels are cut or an artery, if it is a nerve, it is not in its skill but that it should be avoided care of it at that which makes violent stiffness, just as if with vinegar and eggs which is old and appears like that which does not knot the nerves and relaxes against that which does
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not stop about any cause of all heat, for the substance of the nerves is hot and the continuation of them is at the brain, which is the most important of all the members
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it must be cured with medicines that are lighter, just as it is caused by washing with lukewarm water, any vegetable smeared in olive oil or not-olive oil, and it is to be washed with lukewarm water and the other parts to be drained in this manner, and to apply heat.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	May it be that if the plague is great, then administer suture, or ligate the edges of it, and apply care to that which is inside until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	May it be that if the plague is depth or has occurred at the lower part, then perforate that in the place where it is most depressed
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	May it be that if in the plague an artery has already been cut and there is obtained a flow of healing, then separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary for that which you cause to it
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May it be that if already the vertebrae of the thigh or all, and the veins of the bowels have been cut, then you adjust the edges of the thigh over the bone of the thigh and do not touch that; keep that equal and reduce that to its natural figure, and strengthen that which is stretched downwards, and let that rest for some days; and care for that which is inflamed in which there is stiffness and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	May it be that if the plague has already made its mark on the bone in price, then pierce that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them; and what is not affected, let that rest until the plague has subsided, and be separate and the evacuation of it be relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then sprinkle over that powder which has been recommended to you
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	May it be that if in the plague there is a fistula, then care for that as regards that from which the memory will come soon in the seat of the head.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the bowels or of a similar kind when there is an opening between the buttocks and it is in space or in the heel or in the groin or in a similar fashion.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of the groin or the heel, and sometimes of the depth, then consider more if the patient has fever than the disease itself; for the plague is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not of depth and the plague is recent at the seat of the healing, then you stop in it for the first hour and sprinkle, and do not strengthen that because it should not be retained in the depth of it and return to the heart and augment the disease, but stop in it attracted, and take away two vegetables that give.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the tongue is not present, then you stop in the orifice of the plague close to old age because of that which arises from the humilities; and make the patient sleep over the plague so that run off what is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	May it be that if already three days or more have passed from the plague and the patient does not have spasmodic fits or convulsions of the heart or stiffness of the belly, and sometimes the other good symptoms of him, then it is to be believed that the plague is saved; and then care for that as regards warm clothes and the other care until it is healed
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	May it be that if the healing is excused, and the time has already passed, then it is to be believed that the fistula has already been made; care for that therefore for the head
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is for incision of space or heel, and is simple on the surface of the foot or thigh, then care for that as regards the powder which precedes suture, if it is great, or as regards the powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	May it be that if already there has been a fracture in the bone, and so already of them has been cut, then you rotate the plague and cover to extract those fragments, if they are separated
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	May be if they are not separated, the hour will read less of what they actually suffer, for the extraction of these is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And as for other plagues that happen in other members, their care is aided by what we have already said
De las plaguas del ventre.	From the belly plagues
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that happens in the belly is great, or little, or medium
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great many veins in the belly there is the intestine or the nerves of the belly, for that is the excessive intrusion of them and the suture of them must be more violent and finer
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a slight rupture is a difficult thing for another method, and if you know that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not abstain from the intrusion of them in the chest cavity, it will open and become swollen because the substance of them is painful.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the better rupture is medium, because in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two preceding species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And it is known that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common that are customary in the sutures of the other plagues of the body
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are specific that are common in other plagues, but in the suture of the belly they are more specific
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you that you show any exposure and declaration
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the plague is slight and there is any cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce that, the hour is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine is inflamed by the cold of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Therefore when it is thus, the hour commands that you cover that area with a sponge soaked in warm water, or that you grasp with water squinant, and cypress, and pepper, and cloves until the inflammation is resolved
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some veins cause that which has styptic, and it is better that only water alone in resolving the inflammation
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Therefore when the inflammation is resolved, the hour moistens the intestine with water in which it is covered with salt and flowers, because by that the substance of them is alleviated for little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the substance of them is excused nearby this care, the hour will split the rupture with a small instrument that has pierced wounds.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first care is better when it is immediate that it is not excessive, and that it is not an occupation to dry that which is not necessary and detrimental
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, if its form is such that:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part is acute, and the other is not acute, and the blunt extremity, and not like the sharpness of a sponge, be neither obtuse nor acute but slightly rounded
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore when the plague is amplified and is outside the intestine, the hour commands that its reduction be according to its natural form, in the proper cavity, if possible over water, because it is better
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the rupture is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, the hour commands that you place the patient on the two thighs and suspend your steps more numerous than usual; and if it is in the higher part of the belly, the hour commands that you suspend your hand and the feet more numerous than the other parts
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, the hour suspends your understanding and your consideration for a moment so that the part in which the plague is located is higher than the other
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus command that you administer water in the great plagues and in the medium plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small plagues, suspend water that is to your preparation, and order that it be administered between your greatest pains, which has the whole rupture in its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and order to uncover from this to that that if there is any cause of any suture to be made another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common suture technique: that you grasp the needle, or companion of the needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and that you lay aside the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the needle one, or more than one that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the codena, at the two extremities of the cipa which is left by the codena of the parts that are detached, until you have pierced that part; and you have already added two extremities of the codena and two extremities of the cipa, and so there are four orders in total.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And thus stretch the thumb firmly doubled at the root of the nail, and some veins are seen from two parts together, and add the two lips and the tongue together for collection downwards; and let the thickness of the toe rest and fix another nail in that place, and join that thumb firmly as before; and do not cease until the whole contraction of the tongue is complete.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the fine needles shall move between the fat and the lean, for the fine needles do not pierce the flesh with much force; and the thick ones are difficult to handle in the flesh, and thus it is necessary that they should move in leanness and fatness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be held at two extremities of the flesh at once, for thus the flesh will not be pierced too violently and the wound will be closed before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the sutures for the wound is not to be hindered in its consolidation
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And thus puncture the extremities of the needles so that they do not irritate the patient excessively; and stop over the suture fine particles expanded from every side, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has already consolidated
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These methods of stitching with needles in this way are more convenient in small wounds, because they require only one or two needles or to surround them
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is more common: and it is that you administer the suture at four extremities, that is, the two extremities of the thigh and the two extremities of the heel, in one line, with a needle in which the thread is firmly enveloped in leanness and fatness
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And thus when the needle has pierced these four extremities, reduce the needle from that middle part from which you began, so that the thread retracts somewhat from the wound, so that the suture is like the second suture mentioned above which is more firm
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the middle finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is sufficient for the men.<end_turn>
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture I cured a a man who had a wound in his belly which was affected by an injury to the greatest palm of his hand which was caused by a splinter, and it was the disruption of the greatest part of the wound over two palms of the thumb and was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and when I had reduced that after the thumb had been outside the wound for xxx hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated within fifteen days or thereabout, and I cured him of that and he is healthy; and thus it is known among the people.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had given up hope that he would not recover; and by a miracle, for I know of no other medicine, I cured him of that, because in that place there was neither wound nor any medicine, but I continued to change the dressing twice a day and to bathe him diligently with honey water until he recovered
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I say two special methods of stitching according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you begin with the suture of the thigh, and enter the needle from the distal part to the proximal part.<end_turn>
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates the thigh and in that middle lacerate according to the rule and in length throughout the body, and leave the heel where you have introduced the needle; and make penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the distal part to the proximal part in the other extremity of the limb.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus when you have finished that penetration, then make another penetration in that same extremity from the distal part to the proximal part; and leave the heel that is in that part, and make penetrate the needle in the other extremity from the distal part to the proximal part of the limb
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And thus make penetrate in such a way that the former penetration that you made into the limb is in the middle of the latter two penetrations.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And thus begin from this middle side and go towards that extremity which is the heel in the other side, and extract the needle from the thigh which has penetrated, and reduce that in that thigh and close the heel which is in the other side to this extremity; and extract that from the thigh which is part of the limb.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make one loop and another, and make one loop almost like another until you have closed all that is distal according to that example
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this method of stitching is that you close with a suture of skin in which you join the skin, namely that you close the heel with a loop from the part of the extremity of the thigh, and that you leave the other loop until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	May the second kind of suture which you say with certainty is Gualia, and this is of such nature that your thing which you do in this way, like many doctors do in like manner, adds all parts to their appropriate parts; and apply the extremity of one of them to the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of them, and that is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Because you keep the needle at the mirror extremity at your command, and pass it through the depth in that hole, and draw out two extremities of the gut; then reverse the needle and make it penetrate from the hole to the gut in two extremities of the gut.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then reverse those folds, and make penetrate whatever of the gut's parts that are within the hole into the hole in two extremities of the mirror other than those on the contrary side
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of stitching is better than the common light stitching, and is a stitching of which there is precedent to remember
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the term of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And I say to you again, the belly stitching is rectified with two needles, so that you enter into these with every thread, and begin with the inside needle of that which is due to you, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the stitching of those which do the body well.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, the hour of stitching it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More pleasant is the judgement of the plague than the judgement of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of which is that when you become conscious of the recent plague in the summer that the air alters that, and reduce the gut and do those things and apply them properly, then stop over that dusty sediment
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then stop over that until those which are present enter into your presence until they make a hard stone and bring tears, and consolidate the gut and the mirror; and then care for that just as for the care of the other plagues until it is healthy
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you are not present with the medicines, then stop over that so much, because it begins to vomit bile, old blood, and change those two meals that you give, just as you have been taught, until it is healthy, for you do not digest another medicine in great quantities when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the plague communicates with lesions to the principal members, then cover that you immerse linen soaked in olive oil of quality, or in scented olive oil, and stop that in the circuit of the places that are between the armpits and leave the veins open.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the belly buttons, that many meals have been omitted, then cry out that black wine be given to you, and more so if the putrefaction has reached the gut and is well-penetrated into the cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that that which is of the great belly is more readily healed than that which is in the small belly
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is a difficult healing because the belly which is called “gegunu” does not receive the healing of the plague that fills it in its entirety; and that is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and for the magnitude of it that is in those, and for the subtility of the body of that, and for its proximity to nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you have that recent, reduce that according to your custom that you reduce the guts well
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if it has passed to the space and has already become green or black, then strengthen that thread that you have over the place that is detested by it, so that there comes out a flow of health, for in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then say that another that is another ligament, and stop two extremities of the thread pending the part from which the plague has been expelled so that over you there is relieved the attraction of it because of the removal of the cloth and the emission of the bile of the plague
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Memories of the plagues when they happen in the gut.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the belly and it is slight, it is possible that it may be cured in a short time, for to help that you may see that which was placed sick in the lower belly with percussion of the hand and was the plague of the lower part of the stomach, and the plague was old and well-formed, and there was fistula, and egestion of it with vomiting and diarrhea
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And so I follow the treatment of them already that it was not confident in the healing of them, but I cease to subtiliate that until the body is healthy and the place is consolidated
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I say that when the area is already consolidated, time has passed over the patient's illness which happened by chance in their belly; and let them not be troubled by anything that happened by chance and remain in their beds eating and drinking, and I order that they be bathed and exercised in these things.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And I say that some experienced people say that when the plague comes upon the belly and is small, it is necessary to bind it in this way: take large sponges; and adjust the two lips of the plague and place a sponge over those that cover the mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore, when you take hold of those and stretch your mouth, cut off the head of the plague, which adheres and is not dissolved.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another sponge upon the first one, and do not cease until you have put on another sponge according to the quantity of the entire plague.</end_of_turn>
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And reduce that and keep the plague contained; and leave those heads attached in the belly until the belly is healed; and do not do anything to the patient at night.</end_of_turn
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the belly is tied to the firm thread which is the belly of the beasts that are attached to it, because it is more flexible; and take hold of the extremity of these beasts' bellies, without tearing, and bind the extremity of it to the firm thread, covering it, and put that thread into needles and tie that up in the disruption.</end_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this way of stitching with sponges is nothing but by faith and hope.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Maybe if the plague is great and wide, mostly if it is in one of the subtle bellies, which the hour does not know how to handle but with subtlety, and not with healing of it from all.</end_of_turn
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Take care of wounds and fistula.</start_of_turn>
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	It is known that every plague and swelling diminishes when it grows old and becomes antique, and it is called a wound, and is not consolidated and is not broken off, the hour that in any member it is, it is universally called fistula and is called that swelling.</end_of_turn
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is recognized foul, hard, white with which there is no pain and which is flattened like the swelling of a wound of an ass; and for this reason it is named that wound, that is, ass.</end_of_turn
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in a wound that the humors become wet, which breaks; and when the humidity is strong, it is broken in a few hours.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And many herbs this humidity move, and it is little, and is great, and is subtle.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said that in the division, when I spoke of plagues, that every wound that is not healed or that is not in its pure state of nature, is not except for one of these causes: either for scarcity of health in the body; or for malice of it; or because there is hard cartilage between it and the lips that hinders the birth of flesh; or because of bad air; or because the matter that is in it is putrefied; or because the medicine is inappropriate for the treatment of it; or because of corruption in the region, and that is pestilence; or because of the property of the region itself as in Saragossa, in which it is difficult to digest diseases and slow in the healing of swellings by nature.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them and their treatment with medicines in the division.</start_of_turn
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I tell you that I make known the treatment of fistula which is useful by the way of surgery with the hand.</start_of_turn
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula can happen in all parts of the body; that of those are fistulas that go to the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spleen, or the belly, or the bladder, or any of the vertebrae, or any of the compound joints like that of the hand and foot; and of those that are close to the main limb and resemble them.</start_of_turn
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, that fistula which is treated in this way is one of the diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive treatment, and is occupied with work and ignorance.</start_of_turn
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is of any fistula the depth of which does not reach these places that I have said, and you hope and trust in the treatment of it, and you wish to come to know it, when you attempt to remove or cut, and if the fistula goes according to rule, ask for it.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Maybe if the fistula is tortuous, however, when you attempt to grasp it with your hand, because the air of the belly is alleviated and curved due to the tortuousness.</start_of_turn
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula is not horribly painful, it is not within your power to determine its cause.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is not horribly painful, it is not within your power to determine its cause.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the fistula is not horribly painful, it is not within your power to determine its cause.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the fistula is not horribly painful, it is not within your power to determine its cause.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If the fistula is not horribly painful, it is not within your power to determine its cause
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If the fistula is not horribly painful, it is not within your power to determine its cause
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	If the fistula is not horribly painful, it is not within your power to determine its cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	If the fistula is not horribly painful, it is not within your power to determine its cause.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And thus the doctor must take charge of many patients at the same time, and do not linger over them, for I was called away.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And behold the condition of the patient, with the running of matter from their wounds for great pain; and already the colour of that man was pale and yellow
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And thus I introduced the thumb into one of those wounds and grasped the thumb to the bone
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I saw and inspected all the wounds and found them to be open from all parts of the wound
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And thus I covered myself and incsed one of those wounds until I scraped off a piece of the bone, and I stopped that corruption, for it was already dead and rotten, and there was already corruption in the limb until I had penetrated into the marrow
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And thus I did what was prescribed to me and prepared by the bone exposed
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I say that it is not in the bone but that corruption which I scraped off and which I held, and I had already extracted it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I stopped the restoration of the plague with long-term medicine, and it is not consolidated
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And thus I repeated the process and discovered it once more concerning the primary discovery, and I stopped the continuing corruption of the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I say that from that corruption I saw that it must be treated, and I make the cure and restoration, and it is not restored
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And thus I found it again in another way and I did not stop incuding the small parts little by little until I perforated the restoration of the limb, and it is not restored until I have included almost the whole of it, and I extract the marrow from the middle, and I restore it with medicine, and it is consolidated and healthy
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of the limb and its section, but for the care of the freulence of the limb and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, which it undergoes at all hours by excessive evacuation without any bad evacuation
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore health is for the entire healing, and nothing is more useful than the care of the limb in its place; and it is good to restore the virtue of the limb; and it is preserved in its care and is not hindered in its walking or at any time in any matter.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is on the bone of the limb already fractured, the hours that you must follow this manner: that you take a ligament and stretch it at the extremity of that bone, and command someone to extend that in its entirety; and suspend that ligament of wool more thick than the first ligament; and then place that over the bone which you leave behind the bone that you are closing, and extend the limb so that you draw the bone to the parts beyond, and you uncover the bone over the place where you wish to close it so that the wound does not damage the bone
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And suspend it firmly or put a board behind the bone adequately, because when you do that the wound is not prohibited from cutting the corrupted bone
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover that the closing is made little by little, because if it is in the hollow of the bone the corruption will not appear in its appearance to the feeling, and forces the closing of the other way.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, advance one part continuously with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, the hours you uncover the bone entirely; and suspend firmly from both sides, and close that from which the corruption is absent until the closing of the other part is completed
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the closing must be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said<end_turn>
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the articulation, incisions that corrupted articulation, and close the bone from which the continuation is made of the other part<end_turn>
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two articulations, the hours are not in their ratio but are cunning<end_turn>
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the wrist or ankle, it is not easy; however cover that you inquire about the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and open that, and manage that according to any rule that is possible to you, and in case of doubt make it rectifiable to you, when it does not make your veins or nerves contradict<end_turn>
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you must know what is incisions and what instruments to use for incisions of these bones are not according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the thinness and greatness and smallness of those, and the hardness and rarity of those; for that you must prepare for every kind of operation the appropriate instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation implies great skill on your part concerning the instrument which you will employ; for it demands great study, long experience, and knowledge of the methods of this art, as well as experience in the treatment of diseases, which is convenient for all ailments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And so I inform you at the end of this chapter concerning the names of the instruments which you will employ; for with these which you will proceed according to your prohibition, which you will experience upon other occasions.
Forma de serra:	It is not clear what you mean by "forma de serra". Please provide more context or rephrase the sentence
Forma de autra serra:	It is not clear what you mean by "forma de otra serra". Please provide more context or rephrase the sentence
Forma de autra serra:	It is not clear what you mean by "forma de otra serra". Please provide more context or rephrase the sentence
Forma de autra serra gran:	It is not clear what you mean by "forma de otra serra gran". Please provide more context or rephrase the sentence
Forma de ray:	It is not clear what you mean by "forma de ray". Please provide more context or rephrase the sentence
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Both the head and points of this ray are shaped like the star-studded sky, and the points are similar to those of the astrophysicists.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not advisable that the heads of the joints be fractured when they are corrupted, or that the large mouth be widely open
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The larger razor-like shape of the others
Forma de razori menor:	The smaller razor-like shape
Forma de razori lat:	The flat razor-like shape
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The other razor-like shape is appropriately made: the arch is broad and the edge is keen, and the body of the instrument is struck downward in a puncture fashion
Forma de lu:	The shape of it
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The shape of the razor in which there is a concave area
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The other subtle razor-like shape
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The shape of another razor with curved extremities
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The shape of an incisor with which bones are incised
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The shape of another smaller incisor
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The shape of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in various locations in proportion to the bones
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of a ray which is appropriate for the perforation of bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and acute-tipped
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and is similar to all the causes we have mentioned concerning razors, scissors and saws
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the incision of the extremities and the cutting of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are sometimes painful either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic one, or as you have treated that corruption for the care of those medicines and the care does not relieve it, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the limb without you having treated it, when in such a case you must incision that limb in order that the pain may cease before the corruption becomes more serious or deadly than the limb itself.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	A sign that this must be done is that the limb becomes black before it is healed, or that the blackness approaches closely before the putrefaction of that part of the limb itself has disappeared; therefore you must immediately incision that limb in order to prevent it
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is the percussion of various venomous causes such as a scorpion of the sea, or a fox, or a bite of a viper or anything similar
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incision the finger and do not allow the corruption to spread to the hand
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if the corruption affects the wrist, then you must incision at the root of the forearm, and do not allow the corruption to spread until it has consumed the forearm itself
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you should see that, then you must incision the forearm within the elbow joint
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If this happens again, and sometimes even when the elbow is involved, the death of the disease is in that case; and to administer another cause along with the treatment is in this case nothing more than a useless effort.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, if the corruption affects the foot when it concerns the great toe, then you must incision that within one of the bones
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If it comes to the nail of the foot, then you must make an incision over the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it comes to the nail of the foot, then you must make an incision through the skin to the joint of the nail
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the nail, then it is not useful to do anything but let it die, and leave the patient to his fate.</start_of_turn>
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The way to cut or pierce the limb is that you grasp the ligament behind the place where you wish to pierce, and grasp another ligament over the bone; extend the minister one ligament towards the sides, and extend the minister another ligament on the other side; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments somewhat wide until the whole flesh is exposed; and then pierce or cut.</start_of_turn
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And you must keep the hand away from the bone of all sides so that it does not touch the bone itself, and that the patient receives the wound adjusted and apply the cautery.</start_of_turn>
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If blood flows freely when working, then you must cauterize the area cautiously, or stop the bleeding by pressing on it; and then return to your medication until it is completed.</start_of_turn
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected limb with a ligament as desired, and care for him until he is healed.</start_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I urge you to send a man to the heel of the foot, this means that this accident is like adding fuel to the fire that was already there.</start_of_turn
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first of all appears in the heel of the foot until it affects the whole foot.</start_of_turn
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man should prepare himself for his fate more than by receiving the cure for the limb with the greatest care, and he will pierce that foot at the joint, and the foot will be healed.</start_of_turn
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time that malicious corruption stays in the nail of the hand indicates.</start_of_turn
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And in my opinion, if you wish to understand this matter and overcome the uselessness that hangs over the hand of the physicians, then remove the uselessness from the body of the disease; and it will not be useless and will begin to go away from the hand as soon as it starts in the foot.</start_of_turn
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	I urge you to pierce the hand yourself, and I do not fear the repercussions of that uselessness, for I believe that it is better for the patient to die than for him to endure such a painful and useless treatment.</start_of_turn
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	When I am gone from you, return to your land and tell me that that man prepared himself and pierced his hand throughout, and that he is healed.</start_of_turn
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have told you this story only to make you understand what happens in this disease, and what is the reason for its significance.</start_of_turn
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Beware of doctors who are lacking in skill and who practice medicine carelessly.</start_of_turn>
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When a boil appears in a fleshy limb, the space of the boil is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it is ruptured and pierced, and the pus is expelled from it; the limb remains as before as if it were a vessel, and the surrounding tissue is as if it were finely ground, and there is no further corruption, and it does not imprint on the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is simply pus, and it is not named fistula.</start_of_turn
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption spreads to some limb, then it is called a fistula and does not stop.</start_of_turn
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for this is to lance that wound throughout as if it were a wound, especially when it is fine and is beneficial like mucus, and comfort yourself that it does not adhere to the bone due to its corruption.</start_of_turn
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the wound will adhere and that the corruption will not cause any further harm, and the wound has spread to the face, then treat that as if it were a boil.</start_of_turn
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you must consider the nature of the wound, and if it is large, and the limb which has become foul-smelling, then treat that with an Egyptian medicine which is made from olive oil, vinegar and mustard seeds, and which is applied to the wound in a vessel, and covered with a cloth until the medicine has finished working and has achieved its purpose.</start_of_turn
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and cleanse with that the wound, strengthen its edges, and leave the medicine on for two hours.</start_of_turn
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And immediately extract that which is causing the pain; and do so until the pain is gone and the swelling has subsided.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	When these things are powdered with vinegar and water, except when this remedy is not at hand; then take the ashes of vinegar, and mix them with water; and do so until you confirm that the swelling has subsided.</end_of_turn>
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the vinegar water, then do the following: clusterize the foot with vinegar and honey and add sulfur three times, and clusterize the foot with wine and honey mixed, because honey has the property of softening and washing away, and the wine makes the swelling adhere to the bone, and especially when there is excess of stiffness and dryness.</end_of_turn>
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have made the foot cluster several times and you confirm that the swelling has subsided, then clusterize the foot with water that makes the flesh soft in it.</end_of_turn
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take a dose of diaphincum and dissolve it in olive oil and wine vinegar; or clusterize the foot with various medicines and add others that have the properties you have already read in the treatise on medicines.</end_of_turn>
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the joint is tight in which the canula of the cluster is not received, then gradually enlarge that small opening, and keep it covered with gauze moistened with Egyptian or balsamic ointment until it is enlarged.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Similarly, if the opening is wide, then suture the edges of the joint and leave the amount that is necessary for the cluster to be placed.</end_of_turn
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the limb from which the pain originates is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that area below the limb that is under the joint so that the limb can run smoothly, because when the limb is constrained in the bend of the joint the flesh in that area is compressed.</end_of_turn
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the joint outside the bone below as you wish, then you must tell the patient to prepare the limb with the preparation for which the limb should be flexed willingly according to your order and not to be retained by any cause of the limb.</end_of_turn
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are stopped over the convenient part of the joint until you wish to extend those over the edge of the limb.</end_of_turn>
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And take as much medicine as is necessary to communicate the whole joint; and immediately insert under the edge of the joint a piece of sponge slightly larger than the opening of the joint; and extend over another part of the limb the unguents that you will choose according to the degree of swelling, and stop it over that part for a long position of the joint so that the swelling of the limb is relieved without causing excessive pressure on the limb itself for several days.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May whoever is on the joint, which you leave for an hour, so that the swelling that is adjusted in it is evacuated.</end_of_turn
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if the swelling that comes from the limb is mobile or little, or is digested or undigested.</end_of_turn
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And as for the location of the joint, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is swollen.</end_of_turn
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that is gathered over the joint has already adhered, or has proper adhesion, then you must remove it or take it away on the third day. And when you remove the dressing, change the bandage for another and renew the ointment.</end_of_turn
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May there not be any subtle viruses remaining on the limb, because the healing of the joint is proper, because some people in whom the generation of flesh is delayed in the course of the wound, and in those in whom it is beneficial to the contrary.</end_of_turn
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the limb has been swollen for several days and the limb is still undigested, then you must know that the joint does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the joint is delayed and is the cause of the prolongation, then you must adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humified in their substance and in their virtue, they are dry just like diaphincum when adjusted in excessive swelling.</end_of_turn
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And it is more useful to take diaphincum and dissolve it in olive oil, and mix it with wine vinegar in its substance, and apply it to the area, and use it.</end_of_turn
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And in that action, when not for the limb, take diaphincum, honey when it is cooked, and use them; or take myrrh and aloes and incense, crush them all and powder them over honey when it is lukewarm, and apply that over the bandage and strengthen that over the joint; and apply that until the honey has been cooked, and powder over the bandage and strengthen that.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Every day these treatments are administered with long-term aristology and reason from celestial bodies (for it is a celestial body) and herbs and centaury, and use of these simples or adjusted, crush these and sprinkle over the wax which I have recommended; and then apply of it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the pain persists, and it is not healed by this treatment, it is necessary to know that the corruption is in the bowels, and already inquire in the bones or in the other members hard or flexible or to the ligaments; then treat it with fistula treatment, as it is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment for panaritis and nails attracted and incision of the finger added and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritis is a swelling that does not leave the nail of the finger or toe, and often occurs in the other fingers, and as it persists and its treatment is less effective, or if it is a swelling of a swelling, or if it is corrupted, and pus comes out from it until it consumes the root of the nail, and it is corrupted all the way to the bone, and it is foul-smelling, and the finger is deformed, and its color is pale yellow.</end_of_turn>
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you see that which we have said in the division and you do not relieve your treatment, know that you must instill the whole surrounding area with a burning instrument to cauterize the wound and thus prevent further damage.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is soft and the nail is sound, and the nail has already become loose from the flesh, and it is already bursting and bleeding, know that you must leave the tip of the nail that is bursting the flesh alone, and put pressure on it and stab it with an instrument, and hold over it what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines until it is all absorbed; and then treat that which remains until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already spread to the bone, know that you must burn the bone and extract it, for it is never healthy for the bone to be corrupted.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corruption and the infection go up to the finger, know that you must burn it in one of the nails as you deem, and then treat that which remains until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail suffers percussion or swelling, and if there is violent pain, know that you must at the beginning apply cold compresses to the patient, and then dry the nail with a rough cloth and cut it across, and take care that the cut does not go deeper than the nail itself, for you will thereby cause the violent pain, and if the cut is too deep it will cause the surrounding tissue to swell; and treat that area with that which will relieve the pain.</end_of_turn
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And thus it is said adjusted, which is natural in the most of households, is very tough because of the flesh, and is very tough in the bones, or is very tough in the nails.</end_of_turn>
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And these are born from the root of the joint, or from the birth of them in the bones of the fingers.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And that which is born in the bones of the fingers does not hurt, but that which is born in the joints is painful.</end_of_turn
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And as for those which are born fleshy, the cut is slight, and you must insert that which will remove the root with a blunt edge.</end_of_turn
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And as for that which is born in the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult; and therefore take care of the amputation of it.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And as for that which is born in the finger, you must at the beginning remove the surrounding flesh around the nail with a circular incision near the bone, and then hold with one of those convenient instruments, and treat that which remains until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	And when consolidation has occurred in the fingers between their joints, either from the natural growth of the limb or from the birth of the fetus or from consolidation of pus or from burning of fire, or for any other reason, know that you must remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And finally, leave space between their folds of skin covered in oil so that they do not adhere to each other, and separate between them, or put between them a layer of soft lead until it is consolidated as you deem.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And in the same way, if consolidation occurs in the bones of the palm, know that you must dry that consolidation according to what is convenient and appropriate for the shape of the limb.</end_of_turn
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the cutting of veins, so are varicose veins.</end_of_turn
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose veins, and these are veins which are swollen with thick blood which is full of melancholic matter, which are in the muscles of the limbs of the body, and their greatest progress is in the limbs of travelers and laborers and porters.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure for this is in two ways: one is that they be insensible and that the black bile be administered, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the thigh is carried out in this way: clamp the limb at the commencement with cold water until the large bile is resolved, which is beneficial for the limb; then stretch the limb of the patient at the part furthest from the navel towards the part of the knee with a bandage, and clamp the vein in one place or in two or in three at a wide section, and elevate the black bile to the upper part of the thigh towards the belly button, and withdraw it in urine until the quantity that you wish has been extracted, and that which will tolerate the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And so do these things, and command them to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment for phlegm until the veins are empty and until the patient is better
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Therefore, the elevation of the limb is done in this way: you stretch the limb of the patient, if there is movement in it, and then bathe it and clamp the limb with cold water until it is stiff and the veins are relaxed; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if there is no bath available, until the limb is flaccid
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And so dry the cord in the root of the vein by section in the long or in the back of it must give it a blow, or in the buttock of it must do so.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And so close the cord with nails and draw out the vein throughout until it appears, and it is necessary to take notice of the sensation that sometimes accompanies this, which often descends to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore, when you have finished and closed the cord, you must sometimes remove the white thread that remains.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And so you must put your hand away when it is elevated and grasped from the cord, and suspend it with an ointment of honey or balsam
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And so do another incision nearby that section for three fingers, and then draw out the cord from the part below the vein until it appears
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And so elevate that and cut that behind the second incision must give it a blow, and then extract that and elevate that until it is expelled by the second incision, and extract that from the incision above that
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you have extracted that from the most distant incision or from all the incisions, until all is expelled; and then cut that
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey my order to extract and elevate, then insert a strong needle twice and tie that, or insert your hand and grasp it all over until it is numb
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Beware that it is not pierced; for if it is broken, it is useful to your difficulty in elevating that and is harmful to the patient for that night.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that is expelled, then pause over the place of the wound with a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil fragrant and unfragrant, and care for that until it is healed
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the patient has suffered from contravents having swelling to which is related the covering of the parts, and it is not according to the rule as we have said, then you must cover the wound over all the parts of swelling and the places of covering, and suspend that with nails until that whole is raised up.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Beware that you must not pierce the vein and that you must not touch that, for it is difficult to elevate that; and use your prudence in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	This section describes how to perform the incision correctly, but the translation is too long to be included here.
Forma de unci orp:	This section describes the ointment that should be used, but the translation is too long to be included here
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not urgent like nails nor is it acute at the extremities so that it does not pierce the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it were soft, it would pierce the vein by its softness; having in it excessive thickness as we have said
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is engendered in the limbs towards the lower parts just as in the land of the Arabs and in the Indian lands towards the lower and arid parts having little vegetation and in which there is no reed or tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	The other limbs also suffer from similar pains.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	Their swelling is caused by corruption which leaves the skin like that of a serpent bitten by worms and insects, and worms are engendered between the skin and the flesh
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the swelling caused by the coming of these worms is that the vein which is at the root of the inflammation becomes inflamed; then the area is swollen; and the vein begins to rise from the place of that swelling as if grazed by a plant
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And thus when they appear at the extremity, then cover that part with a plum whose weight is equal to two drachs. Enter two drachs, and note that and leave the plum suspended from the limb.</end_of_turn>
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever there is a cause of this sort in any part of the body, cover with lead and do not remove that
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is not prolonged, then prick a a part of it and cover with lead; do not prick that which is raw because if you prick that which is contracted it will enter the flesh and cause swelling and ulceration of the flesh in that place
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be treated gently and be gradually extracted until it is expelled from behind the limb and does not remain in the body for any cause
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein is said to be about five palms and a thumb in length and I believe that one of twenty palms is enough.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is pricked at the time of treatment, then insert the needle into the body of the limb and perforate that for a long distance through the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer corruption of the area for a few days with medicines; and then care for the wound for the healing of ulcers
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has various causes, and mostly when it appears at the ankle or in the foot, and it causes swelling there, and it is said to be of some ulcer or wound.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore take care of it as we have said in the division and as we have said before
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section above worms are generated under the skin and is called bovine gout.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in every land bovine gout because it is not seen in other animals except in men and it appears in all parts of the body, from the head to the feet, and is known by the feeling of pain in every member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is from the corruption of some humors as well as from the bite of worms and serpents and worms and mites in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it enters the body and is elevated to the head, it is perceived at the scent, for the strong smell which is in it causes the destruction of the scent, and what was seen there is no longer seen
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, you must not do so without seeing its walking and appearance, and when you see it you must cover what is above it and what is left of it must be bound and contracted strongly, and then dry over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is prolonged in the flesh and you do not remove it, then you must place a pointed cautery over the area until it remains, and the greatest cause which is feared is the corruption of it as we have said
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Or if it sometimes arrives at the head near the scent, then strengthen over the nails with great stricture, and dry over it, and extract that; and make sure that the patient takes purgatives of medicines evacuating bad humors, and keep away from foods that cause corruption
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the section above gout is not cured by surgery.<end_turn>
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land nafir, and it is a pain that is seen in several members, and it is confused from member to member.<end_turn>
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already said what I will recommend to you.<end_turn>
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a woman who was sick in a village, and I saw her arm swollen and I saw a small swelling in the funis vein of the arm, and when I left for an hour, I saw that swelling disappear as quickly as it had appeared, just as if it had been gold that was running from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I remained there with her for an hour while she was in pain in that place and I fixed my gaze on the muscle and here I sat for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then correct the other side of the body until it reaches the opposite arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	Then I recommend that you rotate the entire body sideways as much as you see fit; and do not marvel at the change of position and the speed of the limbs.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I have already seen this happen in my days according to that method, however I have seen many who experience pain when the limbs are rearranged.</end_of_turn>
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I do not see this in the women in the same way as in the men.</end_of_turn
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is anything other than that the woman was of great age, when there are many bones and veins that are exposed, and in this state the sensation of that sudden change is produced.</end_of_turn
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that this does not appear according to this retrograde movement in those who are delicate and have humors of veins that are easily congested.</end_of_turn
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to care for them, and the patient feels that pain, do not be deceived by appearances as we have said, but strengthen your hand over that area and leave it loose so that the congestion is released, and cauterize the area.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Perhaps if you do not see the thighs at this time, when you care for what is outside of the body and what expels the congestion, and sing those who are pale and yellow, and those who resemble pills of lead and of mercury.</end_of_turn
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.</end_of_turn>
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they are cast, because their diversity is that some have large heads, and small, and concave, and blunt; some are solid; and some have three angles, and some have tongues; and some have stems.</end_of_turn
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the way in which they are cast on the limbs and the feet is in two ways: because the principal limbs, such as the head, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the stomach, the bladder, and the testicles, are affected by this; and therefore when you strike in some of these limbs and you see signs of death, which I recommend you do, then cover that you avoid extracting the arrow in those in whom death is imminent in the greatest possible degree, and when it does not appear to you that these symptoms are present, and the arrow is not deeply embedded in the limb, then you must extract it and care for the wound.</end_of_turn
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And from the sign of the servant is when you strike the arrow and it passes through it, and is situated over the brain which is about the size of an egg, because this happens by the violence of the blow, and swelling, and vertigo, and hiccups in the chest, and inflammation and swelling of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and great pain is produced by the abscission of the word and the destruction of the voice, and it is situated in the place of the wound a white moisture resembling clots, and yellow resembling the consistency of blood.</end_of_turn
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore if you see these symptoms, do not attempt to care for or extract the arrow, if not outside.</end_of_turn
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	More often when the arrow strikes the heart, it is from the left breast, and is found to be fixed in a hard way, and is not a trivial cause; and it is seen that the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of a claw, and comes out with black blood, and if the temperature of the limbs is cold, and there is excessive sweating, and fainting; and therefore you must know that death approaches immediately.</end_of_turn
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are sometimes like that of black spots from the plague, and swelling of the veins that are near the gut is seen to be collapsed, and the color of the patient is changed, and great breathing is difficult, and gasping for air is required.</end_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the heel, and the pain is like that of small bones, and is accompanied by great pain and spasm, and does not affect all the muscles.</end_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then great vomiting of the plague is seen to occur with any indigestion.</end_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow strikes the liver and is fixed in it, vomiting of the plague is seen to occur with any wound of the flesh or vessel that is burst, and no hope is found in the cure of the extraction of the arrow.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and is expelled with urine, and proceeds from it any other cause to the outside, and great pain is seen over the patient, then you must know that it is fatal.</end_of_turn
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other limbs are saved as much as the face, the ear, the groin, the flanks, the chest, and the adjutant, and the scapulae of both, the furcula, the testicles, and the groin, according to the greatest precautions when the arrow does not find vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend that you take note of this concerning the nature of these arrows, for it signifies concerning the treatment of your wounds.</end_of_turn>
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man an arrow went into the tear duct of his eye on the root of his nose, and I extracted that from the other side, leaving the pupil of his eye, and he is well, without any swelling of the eye at night.</end_of_turn
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a woman who had been struck in the gray of her eyebrow, leaving the eyebrow untouched, and the arrow was already hidden, and we did not manage to extract it from her until a little piece of it adhered to the eyebrow, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in which there were no barbs.</end_of_turn
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And so it is with the woman, and she did not suffer on the eyebrow at all.</end_of_turn>
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the groin, and it was an Arabian arrow, and there were barbs on it; and when I saw that it was immersed in the groin of the patient, I used two guides and I managed to extract it, and the Christian was well.</end_of_turn
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the lower belly, and I thought he would surely die from it; and when more than xxx days had passed and no improvement had been made in his condition, I pierced the arrow and pulled it out, and he was well, without any swelling.</end_of_turn
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had gone through both thighs, and the plague was consolidated over them; and when I approached seven years later, I extracted the arrow from the root of the thigh.</end_of_turn
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in the lower belly, and the plague was consolidated inside her, and it did not improve in her condition even when she was treated with all her natural remedies.</end_of_turn
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in his face, and the plague was consolidated and the arrow was broken, without causing him any pain, and his face remained as before.</end_of_turn
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king who had been struck in the middle of his nose, and already at the time a little piece had fallen out, and the whole arrow was hidden.</end_of_turn
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat the king within three days of the arrow being shot.</end_of_turn
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And when I arrived I found the plague of the arrow was not severe; and when I questioned the patient about any other pain, he did not feel any; however, he still felt a slight pain, leaving the pupil untouched, and I hoped that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.</end>
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered over the area with an astringent and digestive plaster, trusting that the area would recover because I saw the tip of the arrow coming out through that area.</end>
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant swelling at the site of the arrow; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days, and there was no further swelling. The plague had consolidated and the patient was well again, and he confirmed to me that the arrow had come out of his nose on its own within a few days.</end
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And when I had finished with the acute corrosive medicine, I waited for a while, and when I had seen that the tip of the arrow had fallen out, I dressed the wound and extracted the remaining part of the arrow.</end
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And I adjusted the dressing of the wound for that acute medicine until I saw the tip of the arrow clearly, and I left it for a while until four months had passed.</end
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the plague had become more severe, I thought I should remove the forceps from it, and I did so, without observing any improvement, and I did not cease to try to pull out the arrow in various ways, until one day I managed to extract it; and I restored the wound.</end
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored that as well, and the plague consolidated, and the patient was completely healed, without any recurrence of the pain.</end
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of several needles so that you pause what is usual and explain what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by the narration or are not comprehended by this book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The skilled artisans compare little with me; for I know what is present where it is absent, and I find new operations and novel instruments that must descend from the causes outside of this art when necessary
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore I say that needles are not foreign to the members in which they are inserted, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the tissue in which they are entangled; or on the contrary of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is inserted by the tissue in which it is introduced, is a needle proceeding from a fleshy place, and is driven out and withdrawn.</start_of_turn>
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey this time of day, the time that I have laid for you, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh that surrounds it has healed, and the traction of the parts has ceased.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is inserted into bone and you do not obey this time, then leave it for a few days and repeat the traction and movement in each day, and it will finally be withdrawn.</start_of_turn
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey this time at least for a few days, the time that I have indicated to you, then you must perforate in the circuit of the needle in that bone from the whole part towards the middle until the tissue is stretched by the needle, and then extract it.</start_of_turn
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the needle is inserted into the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the bellies of the brain, and appears in the illness at the same time as those accidents which I have said, then I advise you to abstain from the extraction of the needle and leave it in peace until it is equal to almost a few days; for if the needle remains in place, death is not to be prolonged.</start_of_turn
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the needle is not inserted into the bone but only into the body of the bone and does not go into the marrow, and remains in the illness for a few days, and no other accident occurs to it, then you must know the art of traction of the needle and the traction of the marrow.</start_of_turn
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if it is not inserted and you do not obey the extraction, then you must administer supports in the circuit of the needle as we have recommended, and take care of the tissue until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Maybe if the needle is already hidden in the body of the limb, and is hidden from the feeling, then you must inquire about it and if you feel it, then draw it out with the instruments that are convenient for the traction of the needle.</start_of_turn
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the period, and here neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you must wait for the plague to be stretched and for the needle to be able to be extracted.</start_of_turn
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have great anxieties about which you are ignorant, then you must deliberate on the whole surrounding of the needle from the whole part until you have devised something; and think about it, if you cannot devise the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the nails and in twisting them until you obey.</start_of_turn
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the needle in any place, then you must use with your hand and forceps at all parts until you have made that obey; and suggest with your right hand that the needle not be fractured and that it be easily extracted from your difficult traction and extraction.</start_of_turn
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it at this time, then you must leave it for a few days until the parts that are in the circuit are healed, and then repeat what you have to do so that the pain is alleviated.</start_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Maybe if it contradicts the flow of health, then you must administer what we have said of care in the head.</start_of_turn
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your prudence of the incision of a vein or a nerve, or of a cord, and administer instruments in every way that you can for the evasion of the needle; and do it with ease, tranquility, promptness and calmness as I have said and as you have been taught.</start_of_turn
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore you must oppose the needle so that the illness is as it is according to the figure according to which you must carry out the cure of the needle, for it is more useful.</start_of_turn
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Maybe if this is not possible for you, then you must administer what is possible for you according to the figures.</start_of_turn
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Maybe the needles that are withdrawn from the opposite side, or that already proceed from some part to the parts outside, or make swellings of the extraction of the needle by the feeling of the part further from the marrow sometimes; then you must desist from that; and be careful that the grasp is according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then draw it out, because it is useful for the time being.</start_of_turn
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then your touch shall move contrary to the usual, until the needle pierces the bone, and expand itself to the middle, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Or leave it there for a few days, and then repeat that until it comes out
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the needle is stuck there, then immediately pull that out from it.</start_of_turn>
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If it is loose and you want to administer an impulse, then insert your hand and that, if it is silent, stir cautiously so that between the curvature of the bone and the tip of the needle, and then pull that out from it.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the needle is bent, then immediately pull that out from the bone, so that the needle is straightened by that.</start_of_turn
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the needle is poisoned, then you must cover all the flesh in which it is seen, if possible, and then care for that until it heals.</start_of_turn
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the needle sticks in the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough for you to reach it, then touch that with your finger, and if possible remove that from there, for it is necessary to avoid the vein or nerve, and extract that, and then apply the bandage if necessary, and care for that until it heals.</start_of_turn
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which the needles are held:</start_of_turn
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their extremities are like the beak of a thrush that are useful when they grasp the needle so that it does not slip away.</start_of_turn
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And there are various sizes of these, large, small, medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the needle and of its thinness, and of the breadth of the wound, and of the constriction of it.</start_of_turn
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Method of pressing cautiously with this extremity like the beak of a thrush so that the tissue of the needle is alleviated in it, and impulse of that silently.</start_of_turn
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of silent pressing of the extremity.</start_of_turn
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like that for so that the tissue of the needle is alleviated in the bent needle and is pulled out from that.</start_of_turn
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of flebotomy of the veins.</start_of_turn
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which it is customarily bled for flebotomy are ...</start_of_turn of which there are sixteen in the head.</start_of_turn There are two pulse veins that are close to the armpits, which are called the alaris; two herbs that are in the two temporal bones that appear; and two veins in two tears from two holes that are called the lacrimal; and the vein prepared in the middle of the face, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two veins that are at the ear; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and — these are called the palpebrals —; and there are two veins that are under the tongue.</start_of_turn
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are bled in the arms are worth five.</start_of_turn For of those there is a cephalic vein, and it is lateral, and the people call it “the vein of the head,” and it is a medium vein, and is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalic; and they call that “the vein of all the body,” and the basilica is a vein that is stopped in the domestic lap, and is called “citellar,” and they call those vulgarly “the vein of the belly”; and funis of the arm, and is stopped over the elbow, and is that in which flebotomy is made, and is that which appears over the wrist for the manifestation; and the ulnar, and is the vein that is between the thumb and the little finger, and there are two branches in it.</start_of_turn
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of those is that which is behind the curvature of the lateral condyle; and the second is posterior, and the place of it is behind the crease of the domestic lap; and the sciatic vein, and the place of it is behind the crease of the lateral thigh; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.</start_of_turn
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The benefit of the veins that are close to the armpits is to cause ancient catarrh, emigration, dropsy and ulcers of the head of bad antiquity.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: that is that the patient’s head should be raised above the level of the wound, and that the patient’s head should be frequently washed in the occipital region in the place where the veins are to be lanced with abundant and good friction; and that you should strengthen the wound by tying the patient’s chin with a bandage between which appear the two holes and the places of their location are close to the armpits in two depressed parts of the head; and that you should hold that with your hand, and if you sit the patient’s arm down, here you should stretch with your hand.</start_of_turn
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand with the vein and the cord towards the parts below and puncture the vein at the point where it is insident.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the puncture is the amount of two fingers adjusted or around that; and do it as well as you please
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen around the powder and leave that which is inside until it is healed.</start_turn>
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And thus is completed the beginning of the treatment of the wound and of their cauterization.</start_turn>
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More than two veins or arteries that are at the temples help with phlebitis is the ancient emigration and so badness and blood clotting and excessive swelling of the belly.</start_turn
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebitis of these is as I recommend to you: constrict the patient's belly until two veins appear to be visible on the surface and when the pressure of their touch is confirmed by the hand; and when you see that, do not hesitate.</start_turn
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And raise the cord above the vein to the parts below as I have said before, and make the phlebtomy puncture from outside, and elevate the vein with your hand; and puncture that as well as you did with the other two veins; and do as much healing as is necessary.</start_turn
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And remove the dressing of the patient, and leave your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place your hand over that dressing and powder and strengthen that below with great constriction, and leave that which is inside until it is healed.</start_turn
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And thus is completed the reminder of these things, and of those the wound, and the attraction in the beginning of the treatment.</start_turn
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the help of phlebitis of the vein of the front is similar to the phlebitis of the cephalic vein to the ancient diseases of the face and to emigration and swelling and ulcers full of pus.</start_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebitis of these is as I recommend to you; so that the patient tighten his belly with a belt until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called fossori of which this is the form.</start_turn
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture that is at the head of the fossori over that vein and puncture it at an angle or in any other way you like; and leave the healing run as much as you want; and then remove the perforation of the patient and strengthen that which is inside until it is healed.</start_turn
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Many veins are opened with phlebitis, however it does not mean that the phlebitis is of acute extremity just as the others; because it can be of remote extremity, and phlebitis that is according to the transverse section, where the bone is proper and strong, is seen in phlebitis when it is subtle.</start_turn
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More is the help of the two veins that are at the tears of two heels for scabies of the heels for swelling and pus in the heels, and to the diseases of the face.</start_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebitis is that the patient tighten his belly with a belt, and do phlebitis of those, and you stay standing over the head of them.</start_turn
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebitis is successful according to the transverse to a little phlebitis little, because in the area there is no marrow; and if the phlebitis is subtle, strong is the limb of it is fractured.</start_turn
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And do as much healing as is necessary, and pause over those parts, and strengthen them for a night, and then remove them.</start_turn
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More the phlebitis of the vein of the nose is with acute fever and with bad humors, and to the diseases of the face and emigration and swelling that happen in the face, and more especially when it is ancient.</start_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of phlebitis of these is that the patient tighten his belly with a belt and take his nose with your left hand, and make the phlebitis subtle long and leave that in the middle of the head of the nose according to the rectiline, because the vein does not appear to be sensitive here, and because the healing begins to flow freely.</start_turn
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It should be covered that your hand is over the phlebitis little by little and that you let the healing run according to your need; and do that for a night, because that is restored pleasantly.</start_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The pain of the joints caused by cold humors which infiltrate all parts of the body, and the pain which occurs in the feet, is customarily called gout by doctors.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And its quality is that the patient groans without any pain in the belly; and the physician should be placed over the head of the patient, and the patient should sit on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then, gently massage the vein along with wide small strokes; and extract blood according to the temperature, or according to how many times it is necessary; and do so without causing any pain.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then, remove the ligament and tighten the two veins slightly so that the patient is not pained, and keep them within until the plague has healed
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the help of the evacuation of the veins is like little apostemas and blisters of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers which are on the nose and in the throat
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And its quality is that it makes the patient vomit immediately, and tighten the neck of the patient with a bandage, and then rotate the lips of the patient and close two veins, one of which is from the right lip and the other from the left; and the sign of some of them is the blackness of some of both, and more when in the circuit of these veins there are many dark veins; and this is the sign of the case.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is any doubt, leave it to me, and do not know which of these is the case, when you understand the nature of the greater of these, and the pus that comes from them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make them resemble the two veins which are in the lips outside
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is more common to leave the two veins of the lip untouched
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More useful for the evacuation of the tongue is the evacuation of the cephalic vein towards the precipice which is in the gullet, to the disease of the uvula, and to the diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And its quality is that it makes the patient vomit between the teeth just as the sun sets, and raises the tongue of the patient, and leave the tongue between a tooth of the vein and the other tooth of the vein, and the color of each of them is tending towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And when you have evacuated each one; and take care that you do not touch the artery with your hand, for it leaves them like veins
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are evacuated in the groin are usually the ones in which it is customary to do so in all men, and the evacuation of these is useful in two ways, either by making a large incision with a knife or by making an incision with an olive oil needle; or by making a small incision and holding with the thumb and index finger, and this is the way to do it
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is what agrees with section and those subtle things according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the stricture of these
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	A way of making a large incision:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Both thumbs and index fingers like when dealing with large veins with abundant blood, and you must open the veins that contain thick blood clots apparent.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way of making an incision with an olive oil needle
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This incision is of smaller width and more subtle, and it is useful for the evacuation of subtle veins that contain blood clots of a subtle nature
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The greatest help for the evacuation of the basilica vein is one of the three veins: which extracts the blood from the diseases that are left in the gullet and the neck, and from what is left of the legs and the belly
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is recommended to the phlebotomist, when he evacuates that one, that he should guard well and be very careful in that one, because if he does not, he will tear the artery and there will be a flow of blood, so that he must cover that one by making an incision as if it were an abscess.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear by outward signs, it is necessary that you leave that one and move to the other, or that you search for some branch of it; or that you evacuate from the end of the arm, which is also evident; and that you make an incision as we have said above.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May it be that if you wish to perform a flebotomy on them, then cover the stricture of the arm that touches the area within that you commence the incision of the veins, and hold it firmly; and then ligate the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision as with a flebotomy, as we have said; and keep the percussion steady for some space of the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, when you stretch the ligament, swelling in the area that you have marked with a touch, then know that that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid that.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if sometimes during the flebotomy blood flows like urine of a child, know that the blood is from the artery; and keep your hand steady and pause the thumb over that for a long space; and another hand hold the thumb and if the blood is split, know that the veins are split; then tighten your arm and release that.</end_of_turn>
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the urine of the catarrh, and be more temperate with them and do not frighten them for a while until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Or if the blood is not split, and sometimes you must not be present a physician for this, then you must make an incision of the artery if it appears to you; for the limb will be contracted and the blood will be split; or that you take a slight fist and press that, and take the thumb and tighten that over the area of the vein with the stricture descending from the ligament and the dust inside until tomorrow.</end_of_turn
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is split, it is not well; otherwise, know that you must cure that from which the split blood of the veins has proceeded until the recollection of the place of the split veins of the flux of blood.</end_of_turn>
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the cutting off of the blood of the limb is difficult in many situations for the small size of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.</end_of_turn>
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	And from the femoral vein the flebotomy is useful in extracting the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalic, as we have said.</end_of_turn
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And cover the flebotomist if there is any excessive fear in the flebotomy of him, for it is a nerve; and if it is struck in the puncture of the flebotomy and the nerve is found, it will cause him to fall into a stupor, and it will be difficult for him to recover, and it will not be completely healed. And this nerve is often hidden from view by fat; and if it is covered by some people and is subtle and not shown, know that you must stop the flebotomy at the point where you began, and avoid the nerve with your force.</end_of_turn
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you must cut the vein in length.</end_of_turn
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The usefulness of the flebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts the blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the limbs.</end_of_turn
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And take care in this way, if you wish that the flebotomist prick with the flebotomy oil or with the flebotomy myrtle; for that is the safest of all veins, for it is not of the arteries or nerves.</end_of_turn
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	And indeed you must tell your colleague that you must not prick the head of the bone only with the flebotomy, but that you must seek the most sensitive spot, and do not neglect it, if it is not found at the first percussion that is made upon the area of the flebotomy of some fat.</end_of_turn
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	And indeed it is often postponed in some people, when it is not done at the first percussion, but do not neglect it in this case.</end_of_turn
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And the quality of the flebotomy of that and the accidents of it must be considered in their rectification.</end>
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is that you must know that flebotomy is not administered except in the conservation of health and in hope of health and with caution of the occurrence of diseases, and that it is useful flebotomy in one of the veins that are in the vicinity, that is: cephalic, femoral and basilica; and that it is useful to perform the flebotomy at the beginning of spring, about the middle of spring and autumn, and in winter when there are signs of replenishment.</end>
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it is useful to perform the flebotomy and the third day or at the first that after sunrise three hours have passed.</end
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When the flebotomy is administered, it must not be administered when it causes convenience and necessity for this, or at night or during the day, in every hour and at all times.</end
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And take care that the young are not flebotomized until they are eighteen years old, and that the women are not flebotomized until the fourth month after the seventh, and that the old are not flebotomized who have already passed sixty years.</end
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be treated for any kind of pain, let him change his humors beforehand, so that the fistula may be carried out in the clister of the groin, for if there is any retained wound in those parts, so that the veins do not draw out the superfluous humors from the fistula of the intestines, which are pushed, and that they do not harm the principal parts.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not force the patients to undergo surgery without sufficient reason, neither repel them from illness or drunkenness until they have recovered from their ailment, neither from dropsy, for even if surgery is feared in this case with respect to the belly and vomiting, and with respect to the belly contents, and with respect to multiplying of stool and sweat, and of all the causes that dissolve virtue, or that are corporeal or animal in nature
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider carefully the alteration of humors before giving them food and drink, and medicines if it is possible at this time
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And take rest if any cause does not prohibit, or exercise with any exercise so that the patient may be relieved.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the fistula in the patient's feet at the third hour, as we have said previously.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And take care that the patient's feet are protected on that day from all animal accidents, as well as from distress, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as work, punishment, stool, and sweat
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at their leisure make present the causes that usually accompany the men of aromatic odor and smell and of balm and resemblance to those according to the quantity of possibility
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the surgeon over a cushion that is more solid than the cushion of that which must be used for the fistula
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And take out the patient's arms, and cool that with your hand the surgeon gives two or three compressions; and bind it with a bandage two compressions.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the stricture should be temperate, neither too tight nor too loose, for the stricture hinders the flow of the patient; or it is too soft, and the patient's body suffers from excessive sweating.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the stricture is finished, cool the patient's hands between them until the veins are swollen, and declare it to the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the surgeon should anoint the patient's fistula with a little of their own oil properly; and then suspend the patient's hand over the place from which the fistula is to be made, so that the vein may escape a little, and so that the percussion should be relaxed because the vein is the one that is most at risk of being injured by the fistula, and is filled with blood, and when the surgeon places the fistula over that, it is contracted by the fistula, and is detected by the surgeon; and the fistula does not burst the vein, and if it bursts, that is stretched
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, so that the surgeon is calmed and is satisfied in all these things.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if the vein is burst in one compression, it is not good; and if so, repeat what you have done and leave that place a little, or over it put a fasting, if the place is not apostematized.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is apostematized, or the disease is spreading, the hours leave it alone for a day or two, and do not bind it, for that could cause a new bruise, nor enter into rest.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the fistula if necessary
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the patient recovers well, and you fear that the quantity that you wish will not suffice, the hours repeat the fistula in that place according to custom and adjust in the opening a little, and do what is called fasting until the place is apostematized, for the place is apostematized in many men in the case of little opening
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And sometimes if the place is already apostematized, do not repeat it, for it is not necessary for any cause; and suspend over that every part of the wound of oil, because it relieves the patient's body
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this place oil than any other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And in general administer oil of the fistula with which the veins are prohibited of blood flow from the prohibition of the patient's body, and make them become thick like porridge when it is stopped from one of those over the place, because the patient is subtiliated and is softened when it is thick
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the fistula there is generated great swelling, that many compressions have occurred, and especially if it has not bled except for that compression, or in the opening of the vein little by little, and the hours cover it, and suspend over the place a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scraped, and press that for an hour, because it is dissolved
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that area with the same sheet as the one covering the vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If you remain in that place for a few days, any black spot or greenness will not be noticed; but if you wish, stop any cause of evil and look at dissolved matter, or any cause of bile or fat or anything similar to them.</end_of_turn>
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And swollen veins that cause abscesses and swellings should be bled from the basilica.</end_of_turn>
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore place your hand on that area, and if you find that it is too soft, place your compression on that area, for that swelling is bad and harmful; and then keep your hand over that area to prevent any other liquid from flowing from the great artery.</end_of_turn
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply pressure with that liquid which is astringent, so that the area is hardened, and then take care of the other care as before until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And extract from the vessel all the way down according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the wound over the vessel according to how it appears.</end_of_turn
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the vessel is black, then let it be left to rest until it is cured; and in the same way if it is thick, let it be left to rest until it is refined; and in the same way if it is acute, until the acuteness has passed.</end_of_turn
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And concerning him who is full and strong and has need of extracting a vessel in a swelling, let the bleeding of the vein be increased and let the bleeding be liberal.</end_of_turn>
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in him who is pale, let the opposite be done, and cover that one should extract it gradually, and let there be little bleeding.</end_of_turn
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best thing in bleeding a vein is that it is a transverse section, not a puncture.</end_of_turn
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of bleeding is safe from the flow of blood and from the injury of nerves, and is more useful and safer than bleeding from the circumference and length.</end_of_turn
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when there is a fainting fit, you should perform the bleeding immediately; and after the bleeding has been performed with a little piece of bread soaked in wine instead of a thousand grains or of simple saffron, extract from the vessel three or four times.</end_of_turn
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is coldness of complexion, before performing the bleeding give an infusion of ipecac or of fragrant honey with spices like cinnamon, ginger and cloves, or with an aromatic and fragrant infusion.</end_of_turn
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if there is a fainting fit, you should perform the bleeding, and this is a cause of the fainting of the patient; then cover that you give him lukewarm water and an aromatic infusion; and use aromatic substances on the soles of his feet.</end_of_turn
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And make use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.</end_of_turn>
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And who wishes to prevent the fainting of the patient and dissolve the vessels according to their nature, cover that from which the bleeding is performed is for the evacuation of the blood, and the virtue of these is cold, which evacuates the blood gradually, as is appropriate for the quantity of the virtue in continuous days.</end>
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	May he who wishes to prevent the fainting of the patient and stop the bleeding according to the physician's order, and the patient's body is strong, do this approximately seven or eight times from the first bleeding.</end_of_turn
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May he who wishes to withdraw the blood from the body in the opposite direction to which it is inclined, cover that this should be done on the second or third day.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	May that body in which there is no blood left and which is acute and causes the fever, cover that the blood should be extracted from it once and a large quantity should be taken, and that the bleeding should be increased until fainting stops, for it is known that when the bleeder is ignorant and negligent, he causes death instead of fainting, because too much blood is taken when the bleeding is not known.</end_of_turn>
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not cover that you wish to loosen the arms and evacuate the blood according to the day, when the orifice of the vein is closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow, for you must be aware of that and extend your hand firmly, for that is better.</end_of_turn
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let him remain until he is bled according to the method; or remain with the acute bleeding of the vein that is clotting in the orifice of the vein; or stop on the tyriaca or spleen, and compress that which is lighter until the blood is outside and still.</end_of_turn
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is clotted, leave it alone and do not touch it until it has dissolved.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary to evacuate the bowels according to the circumstances, and it is not excused, then leave that about that place or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	When the vein is called "funis of arm" is flecked in the place of the flesh or the bone, when it is not obstructed or hidden, which is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the fleck of the arm is that the patient puts their hand into cold water until the pain subsides and the vein becomes visible again.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And take hold of that ligament or stricture with force; and fleck according to the small traverse, not laterally or longitudinally
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the opening be wide and let your flecking be on the junction of the hand a little bit.</start_of_turn>
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the bowels is prohibited, then iterate your hand in cold water and let the bowels flow in the water until you achieve your need.</start_of_turn>
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	Moreover, even if it is summer, it is excused from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and it is sufficient to keep the body of the bowels in cold water during the winter.</start_of_turn
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The flecking of this vein is more secure than all the others, because it has neither a pulsatile vein nor nerves.</start_of_turn>
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The flecking of the little toe is related to the diseases of the heel.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the flecking of the toe is that you strengthen the hand by ligament or hand, because you put it into cold water, until the vein is swollen and is shown at the same time; and then fleck across; and if you prick it with all of that, nothing will happen to it.</start_of_turn
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep that you do not touch your hand with the flecking, because it leaves only the nerves of the fingers naked of flesh.</start_of_turn
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And iterate your hand in cold water and let the bowels flow in that, because if you do not iterate your hand in cold water, the bowels will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.</start_of_turn
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the bowels are extracted according to the quantity of need, then you rest over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not solidified too much; and immediately cover that you may not tear it.</start_of_turn
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Moreover, the benefit of the flecking of the little toe is that it is related to the diseases of the heel.</start_of_turn
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same in the flecking of the toe as you did in the other.</start_of_turn
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The benefit of the median vein flecking is for the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the major limbs, retention of menstruation, and diseases of the veins and ulcers of the buttocks and ancient abscesses, and their remnants.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the flecking of the foot is that the patient puts their whole foot into cold water and makes over that friction until the veins become visible; and they tie over the ankle of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein they make appear by pulling on the thumb, from which there branch out in the face of the foot many veins.</start_of_turn
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, fleck the widest vein or leave the limb over the ankle where there is swelling of it, because it is better and more salt.</start_of_turn
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you fleck on the face of the foot, then you must keep away from the nerves that are left on the face of the foot, and stop your flecking with the one with which you fleck across, as if you wanted to prick it.</start_of_turn
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And take care of the flecking.</start_of_turn>
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Moreover, if the evacuation of the bowels is prohibited; then iterate the foot of the bowels in cold water and let the bowels flow in that until it is evacuated.</start_of_turn
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flecker makes a mistake in the first attempt, then iterate with the fleck a little while, because the place is salt; and do not be afraid of it, but take care of the nerves as we have said.</start_of_turn
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same with the other foot as well.</start_of_turn
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	The sciatic nerve, which has its origin in the thigh, must be freed from the cavity of the wild beast.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The help of the incision of the limbs is to make an opening when it is for the cure of the cautery
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the incision of the limbs is that the patient lies in water, and that the belly is bound and the thigh is opened from the hip to the ankle with four fingers on a long strip that does not appear except for that
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, do the incision according to each case as you are able, and as for the transverse, it is better; or do the incision from within or the excision from without, because the place of the limb is outside.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most men more hidden; and if you find it, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then make an incision of some limb, and that is the one that appears in the two of the foot rather than in the ear and the nose.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And take care of the nerves, and let the healing run its course as much as you want
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the stricture and keep it over the place of the incision so that the wound is strengthened, because it is healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From the wound and from the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Winds are of barley, or of hemp, or of ivy.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And the wind is useful in two ways: one of them is by scarification and extraction of healing, and the other is by the wind itself
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this wind that is from the scarification is done in two ways, because it can be both with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the winds that are administered with scarification and extraction of healing are fourteen parts of the body, of which one in which the winds are stopped is the ankle; and the middle part of the thigh; and the two parts of the elbow; and the winds from the chin down to the jaw; and the winds from the two eyebrows; and the winds from the back of the head; and the winds from two nails; and the winds from two flames; and the winds from two glasses; and the winds from two cushions; and the winds from two cushions.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	The wind does not extract the healing except from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for that it does not take away the power of these, just as in the case of the incision; nor does it mean that the wind is useful with fire or without fire in any disease that is useful for emptying everything that is in the body
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Maybe if necessary we can cause a wound for disease or for continuing, let us administer it at the beginning and at the end of the month, and in the middle of the month and whenever we want.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in some men the healing is multiplied within them so that they indige extraction of it by the wind and find in the groin head great sadness and bile; and from those who find repletion and disgust on their face and in the groin; and in the groin of the elbow; and from those who find itching in their face and in the front of their head, darkness and confusion in the bowels; and from those who vomit the place of their wound; and from those whose laughter is multiplied; and from those who find the taste of healing in their mouth, or that the tongue is swollen and spitting out healing; and from those who sleep multiplied, and from those who see healing in their sleep nausea, old age, ulcers, and other causes that remain with them
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, whenever in any case of these, and especially if it is in the third or half of the month, we must command the wind to be more useful than it has passed the two or three hours of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the help of the wind from the nape is that when it confers to gravity in the head and to what is poured down to the bowels; however, we must not think that this is equal to the evacuation of everything from the body
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This wind is in the place of the cephalic incision.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not proper for anyone who is feverish complete or in whom there is congestion to use this wind, because it gives great harm to that great document.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that we must not use it for the old people, and in the heads of those in whom there are feverish diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	However, for him on whom it continues to be continuous is useful oblivion; and for that we must command the windworker to stop his hand a little with the wind towards the back, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The wind of alkehel is in the place of the incision of the veins of the stomach and of the belly: and for that it confers to spasm, and to the constriction of bile and to the scissura of the suffering of bile, and to coughs, and to repletion
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The wind that blows from the south brings a small chill, which if it is stopped brings sickness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The air from the south brings cold to the head and the eyes, causes vomiting, diarrhea, and pain in the gums; it is better than a blistering purgation of mercury.</end_of_turn>
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And command the windblower not to touch his hand lest he cut the artery and cause blood to flow backwards.</end_of_turn>
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The southern wind brings cold to the mouth, corrupts the gums, and causes the breath to stink like that of diseases of the mouth, and is better than vomiting of food from the nostrils.</end_of_turn
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Better is the wind that comes from the buttocks than that which comes from the armpits, which brings cold and is useful for replacing heat.</end_of_turn>
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The wind from the buttocks comes from the bowels of the bones and helps to expel three veins, namely the basilica, jugular, and cephalic, for those three veins drain all the other veins which are more numerous in the body, and the smaller veins of the other veins which are more extensive than those which remain within the attraction of the three veins.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	Command the windblower not to proceed too far in his sacrifice, for the place is denuded of flesh, and leaves nerves and arteries exposed.</end_of_turn
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a wind which brings cold upon the buttocks and causes hemorrhoids and ulcers below.</end_of_turn
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	Command the windblower that it be a strong wind, and that it be from the south, for the place cannot bear a strong dry wind; and let there be fine rain falling and a slight sacrifice.</end_of_turn>
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Better are the small cold winds than great ones that make the body cold, cause pain in the bones and the marrow, the bladder; provoke menstruation, cause thirst, and cause swelling and boils.</end_of_turn
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they do not benefit the whole body and cause vomiting in many people.</end_of_turn>
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	The best of all winds is the one that comes from the two cambas.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the winds is that you pause the wind when it starts and wait for a temperate breath, and do not prolong the position of the wind, but rather pause it quickly and keep it slightly, and that the humors come to the place by chance without being forced.</end_of_turn
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Do not cease until you see the place already inflamed and swollen and that the redness of the blood appears.</end_of_turn
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you have sacrificed and iterated the breath a little at a time, and when you have considered the condition of the body.</end_of_turn
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a person of sensitive flesh and rare pores, command that you give him a slight scarification and do not press too much, for the place is not to be ulcerated.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the windblower to enlarge the sacrifice and make a pause, and breathe slowly and easily.</end_of_turn
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickness in the blood, then command that you make two slight incisions, for in the first incision the passage of the fine blood to the blood and water is opened.</end_of_turn
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Better in the second one is the extraction of the thick blood.</end_of_turn
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is not thick, then command that you make a third slight incision for it to succeed.</end_of_turn
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when you want to extract the blood a little at a time or a little, suffice with a slight incision.</end_of_turn
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you want to extract a lot of blood, make a great incision; and if you know that the blood is thick, then command that you make a greater incision for a wound.</end_of_turn
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the end of the sacrifice is only the depth of the wound.</end_of_turn
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person from whom the wound is large, hard, tough, and has wide pores, command that his wounds be oiled with gentler unguents, resolving salves; if it is in summer, thus is oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of chamomile buds, or oil of poppy seeds; and if it is in winter, then oil of marigold, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of saffron.</end>
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is great, cold, it is customary to apply either butter, balm oil, aloe oil, or almond oil, and so on.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the wind blower is of great quantity of soft fat, it is customary to command that no oil be used, and that at these places where there are winds from, to these apply lotions of winds such as vinegar or fresh water from the sun, or water of lilies, or water of marigolds, or water of chamomile, and so on.</end_of_turn>
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And as for him of whom it is said to have moisture of humors, wash his winds with wine vinegar, or water of myrtle, and sage and so on.</end_of_turn>
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And as for him of whom the excesses are great, wash his winds with wine vinegar, or water of rosemary, or sage, or chamomile, and so on.</end_of_turn>
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is commanded that the windblower be protected from bathing; having said that it should be administered immediately after the bath for an hour or two, and that it should rest after the windblowing.</end_of_turn
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done so that the windblower returns from phlebotomy before the windblowing?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: if the windblower or the one who must draw blood is bilious and has a strong wind and an acute inflammation, it is customary to prevent cold causes, such as many vinegar and lettuce, and sage, and thyme, and juniper, and so on.</end_of_turn>
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And suspend their foods such as poultry, fatty meats, foods with vinegar, and foods with fat, and so on.</end_of_turn
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And as for him of whom the complexion is cold, it is customary to command the drinking of almond milk, or almond oil of seeds, or sage, and to smell of marigolds between wool and flax; and it is commanded that he should use little wine and eat little, and suspend the foods of poultry, pork, fish and shellfish, eggs and barley.</end_of_turn
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is commanded that on the day of windblowing and phlebotomy the drinking should be greater than the food.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is commanded that in certain hours before meals such as barley bread, or mustard, or radish before the windblowing or before phlebotomy or soon after, so that the principal parts be comforted and the patient be relieved; and do not take vinegar.</end_of_turn
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	And the winds which are not sacrifices are those which suspend their fetor on the belly and the heel, and on the navel, in the joints of the fingers, and the biting of the ankle, so that these members do not suffer sacrifice upon them.</end_of_turn
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for these except for the attraction of the health of the limb, as when wind blows over a boil in the disease of the flow of blood from the limb; and they use this so that the cold wind is dissipated from the limb, as when it blows over the belly and the navel; for this softens the limb and heals the pain which the wind resolves.</end_of_turn
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is known about the winds that when they happen in their opposition or in their collection, for the power of attraction is strong enough to expel the phlegm from its place and to expel the pus from its place.</end_of_turn
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when it is blown over the belly and the heel you must remove the wind from those closed places.</end_of_turn>
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These winds are administered wet with juice alone; and some are administered with fire.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some foods are administered full of cold water in the diseases of the belly.</end_of_turn
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the wind should be full and greater, so it is cold water alone or water in which herbs are boiled according to convenience.</end_of_turn
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	In the form of wind administered with fire: the breadth of the orifice of two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preparation is half a palm; and it is to be put on the flanks, in the place where it is in the circuit, half of it, the neck should be small according to the quantity that enters it with a needle.</end_of_turn
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Whether from barley or citrons, from orange marigolds, lion's mane, gentian and acacia for so that it does not harm the limb from its position over it.</end_of_turn
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it put the candle with the fire.</end_of_turn
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	E ja sia questa ventoza gran major de quella la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de quella secondo le malautias e la etat di chi la usa di quella.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And this current of air is much greater than the one we recommended; and the little rest that remains is according to the illness and the condition of the one who uses it.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this current of air is that you extend the flame over the limb by kindling a little candle of wax downwards from the heel of the little toe, and you place that over the middle of the great toe where the current of air is, so that the flame is kindled around the outside to prevent it from burning the body of the patient
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place your hand over the limb of the patient, and tell him what we have told you, that when we have the current of air and do not ask for it, it escapes through that opening and that the current of air will be as dispersed.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And so light the flame according to its custom, and repeat that if you ask for it again.</start_of_turn>
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the current that is administered in the disease of gout, with water, in which there is neither great toe nor opening, and which is administered only when it is full of water, and is placed over the limb alone.</start_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the way to do it: This current, when it is greater, is better, because it receives a great quantity of water.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xcvii.	The text ends here.</start_of_turn>
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in all limbs but in the limbs in which the position of the current is not possible, because of the small size of those, thus as in the thumb and little finger; or in limb devoid of flesh, thus as in the nose and ear when it is swollen.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those bloodlettings that you have found is that they are in the deep veins of the thigh.</start_of_turn
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they are left lying down during the day and night in deep veins until they become faint; and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and that you evacuate the body at the beginning with bleeding and with current; and that you cool the limb of the patient until it turns red; and that you place your hand over it.</start_of_turn
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are full and cold.</start_of_turn
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw out the area with the current, it is better later in the treatment.</start_of_turn
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then you should wash the area with wine vinegar and pour some cold water over it; and cool and press.</start_of_turn
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the disease prolongs itself despite the bloodletting, and if that remains, then you should place a sponge soaked in cold water over it, and keep that until the discharge is over.</start_of_turn
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the disease is multiplied, then you should sprinkle over it powdered vitriol, or alum and such like causes of stricture, until the disease is cured; or that you place over the area the masses of scraped barley, and that you leave them until the barley sticks to the area, and the disease is cured.</start_of_turn
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And so, if necessary, repeat the bloodletting, when possible changing those.</start_of_turn
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited in suspension, then you should cool the area with the recent disease or leave a needle in the area until the disease subsides; and you should keep it still, so that those that feel some disease may feel better.</start_of_turn
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to finish, sprinkle over those a little of powdered aloe, or salt, or ash, and cover all.</start_of_turn
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus ends the treatise on the third part: restoration.</start_of_turn
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very useful for the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and dislocation of bones.</start_of_turn
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, wise men, listen to me, the fools of the doctors and the vulgarians and those who at some time do not remember the ancients or do not read their books.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is useful that this custom of the learned men in our land be kept private; and I have not forgotten it at any time in my life; and I have not learned it from anyone else, but by reading the books of the ancients and studying their understanding of them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I add to this experience and study throughout my life.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And thus I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my knowledge and my experience concerning this matter; for I have abridged what is appropriate for you others and delivered you from the burden of long explanations; and I have opened up in the end of abbreviation; and I have shown in the end of the declaration; and I have formed in this matter various forms of the treatments which are administered in this case, as it is customary in addition to the declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection of this fracture of bones, from which the preceding preface is necessary before we proceed to the remembrance of fractured limbs and diverse parts of each one
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us speak in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters which follow will contain an explanation of the artifices and their station on the truth of those things; for you and those who understand this noble art will learn or reinforce what you already know
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when an accident of fracture or dislocation or twist or case happens, the hour covers that you should immediately apply an ointment or plaster to that, or something similar, if you do not prevent any cause, as befits prudence, or if that which has happened is to a newborn, an old person in decrepitude, or is a time of violent heat or violent cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And thus let there be content in food either of fresh herbs or of boiled meats of fish and crab; and prohibit large meats and fill if of food and of all food which fills the veins of health, except that you keep an eye on the caut of the apostem and if you do not fear the effusion of matter from the limb
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And the hour returns the patient to their first position in which they usually lie.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And thus when the fractured bone begins to be restored, the hour covers that the patient should not be given nourishing foods of great size and hardness in which there is viscosity, as for example oatmeal cooked with water, barley, rice, eggs, fish, beef, calves' brains, and turnips, for in this regimen there is a coagulation of the fracture more pleasantly and gently
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you must know that bones break when they are in the homes that are in the first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they should continue and be consolidated according to their nature because of the drying out of their limbs
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time for the drying out of those limbs, and they continue and are consolidated those which are from them in the end of their life, as for example the bones of small children
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Moreover, nature adjusts and remembers that the fractured bone of every part whatever the cause may be similar to a knot in which thickness adheres and strengthens that which is joined together until it is congealed and joined together, until the end of suffering and rest, as for example fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prevent that from its work
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason it is necessary to abstain from feeding the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and greatness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many different fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you must know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limb, for the fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the forearm; and similarly all the others are diverse among them
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I see in memory all the species of fracture, explained in a distinct chapter of each one
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many different fractures in general.<end_turn>
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in their general; for it is a useful fracture arched another that happens in their stars; and some fractures are useful according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the bone of the thigh and hip and ankle which proceed from some cause and others do not proceed from it, just as it is useful in writing when it is prepared to be written, and is a fracture with plate and disruption in the head, and is a slight fracture of the bone.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each species has its own origin or torment in the restoration of the limb according to what will be remembered in the different places
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of bone fracture.<end_turn
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this reason a bone fracture is known: it is the tortuousness of the limb, and of that eminence and appearance of the limb to the sense, and so of it when it compremes it with your hand
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent tortuousness or if it is not believed to be present, you must not touch it when you touch the bone without causing the patient great pain, for the hour is not here a fracture in that case
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is pain or a small fracture, whereupon you must not move that limb with your hand or compress it; it is best to rest it and apply the appropriate medicine at the opportune moment.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And if the limb is bent and not fractured in two or otherwise so that it does not cause suffering throughout its entirety, when it is necessary to begin to rectify it, do not delay but immediately perform the necessary cautery
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If after the cautery the swelling persists, leave it for a few days until it subsides; and then apply any appropriate means such as lifting and fomenting.</start_of_turn>
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Remember that the restoration of the limb and the application of oil are lighter than the os itself which is affected by suffering.</start_of_turn>
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And thus remember what has been said previously.</start_of_turn
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	Even if there is fracture in the bone, it is necessary to extend this fractured limb from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand.</start_of_turn
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And keep your limb in the position in which it naturally rests, while the fractured parts are extended from the limb; thus you will prevent the return of those tensions which occur in their places.</start_of_turn
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Remember that you must not cause further pain or injury to the patient during your treatment; apply your skill in such a way as to join one bone to the other in a companionable manner in a thousand different ways.</start_of_turn
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And take advantage of your touch with your hand at that moment, and if sometimes there is some other cause, rectify that and embrace that for the amount of your virtue.</start_of_turn
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid excessive extension and compression, just as foolish doctors often do when they perform cautery, causing swelling after their operation, or when they cause contraction of the limb in the way we have seen in the treatment of their boils.</start_of_turn
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And so note, equalize, and perform the operation and tightening of that limb with strictness; rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make them believe that you do not move that limb in the hour of their watchfulness and their sleep, and see their recovery and agitation, and their digestion, and must their evacuation, and must all their movements throughout their virtue; and wait until the position of the limb is one in which their pain is insured, which is what happens when sitting in the position of the painful limb or the lesion; for it is necessary to change that position to another which does not cause pain; and keep them in such a position that the limb is neither too tight nor too loose, so that the limb does not suffer pain when restored.</start_of_turn
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the stricture of the limb is that which I recommend; for you know that fractured limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in their form.</start_of_turn
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those which are small, such as the arm and the finger and the toe, the covering should be of much finer silk.</start_of_turn
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And of those which are large, such as the thigh or the chest, cover them with firm and tough covering, which connects the great limb firmly and strengthens that throughout the stricture with equal tension, so that there is no bruising.</start_of_turn
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And thus begin, make your evacuation and application of the liament convenient at that place, with three or four coverings according to the size of the limb; and tighten your hand slightly over the liament.</start_of_turn
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And behold that at the more prominent part of the place of the fracture, tighten more than the tension of your stricture with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture.</start_of_turn
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And thus lengthen the covering of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the tension little by little, until you have taken hold of a large part of the limb.</start_of_turn
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And thus take another bandage and cover that other covering over the fractured limb with covering, and behold that the coverings are at the furthest part from the fracture; and your operation on the stricture of the covering and in the softening of that which we have said in the first covering should suffice.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And rest between the stoppings of straw or silk in which the pain of the fracture is appeased, if there is pain; but if not, do not rest it for any cause.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And rest upon it another bandage, and tightly embrace these coverings well; if there is no swelling or cautery swelling in the limb, and when the swelling has subsided and the pain has gone; leave it like that for a few days; and tighten over it again.</start_of_turn
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if it is of the joints of the big toe, or of the thumb, or of the index finger, or of the middle finger, or of the ring finger, or of the little finger, let the breadth of each stalk be in this manner and in this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, cover that the staple which is laid upon that fracture is larger and wider than the others, and the length of the staple according to what is legible on the limb in magnitude and smallness; and do so with another object as per your first order. And bind firmly about the staple as per what has been said above, and let your order be according to the place of the fracture, and as much as the fracture is prolonged, the more it is necessary to order.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And cover that the threads be thicker in bulk and fineness, and be of thread like silk. And if the threads are coarse, thus do I know by the operation of the callous fractures that they are loosened during the operation of the nails, and it is a great error when they are equal in size.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And the fine threads are not convenient, for you will not secure the staple with those which you wish. And do not cover that there should be less than a finger's breadth between the staple and the staple.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is of such a kind that his limbs are close to the staple at the places where you wish to place it, then suspend those from the stone or from the leather until they do not cause him damage.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some wounds of fractures are like a wound, and an accident of disruption in the tendon, and I remind you of that in the chapter according to singularity
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that every fractured limb is not straight on the first day; the cause of which is that when the limb is great, it does not cover that you should place it upon the staples but rather after a few days or eight or ten, according to your security of the coming on of suppuration of the wound
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the manner of dressing which the Ancients restored, which were placed upon fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of dressing as a remedy for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complex and mostly for the thighs and the elbows, because it is of that from which neither heat nor cold is blown: and you take from the powder of wheat, which is the marrow of the wheat that hangs behind the movement of the germ in the parts of the wheat
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And be careful that it is thus, but if there is an album of blood, stop the flow of it not so thick nor so fluid; and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of dressing for fracture, dislocation and twist: recipe of asafoetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and marigold, which is ground from a thousand grains of coriander, by five drachs; of myrrh and aloes by three drachs; of asafoetida by two drachs. All of these are powdered and sieved and are mixed with water and vinegar or with egg white if the patient's wound is raw; and indeed use this dressing, which is of good composition and restores the fractured bones pleasantly, and gives relief to many people.</end_of_turn>
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of dressing for which will give relief to fracture and twist: recipe marigold and white alum root by five drachs; of myrrh and aloes by three drachs; of acacia by two drachs; of linseed by two drachs.</end_of_turn
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of them are crushed in a mortar with a stone container, and are crushed, and are comforted with water or with blood and is administered
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of dressing for joints and bones separated in their places, and silk pain that happens in those and in fractures and breaks: take fine linen and immerse it in vinegar and oil and place it over the place.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this dressing is not useful for restoration, of suppuration of the wound and eliminates pain properly
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of dressing that restores bones that are broken: take leaves of fig tree out and wild poppy leaves; gather them all up and make a dressing of them
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; Manier of brief dressing administered gives restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remnant of embolism: recipe of broth of elderberry, chamomile and violets flowers, oatmeal flour, of all things departed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scorched, then comfort him with cold water of colander or with water and use of it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another manner of dressing is stronger in resolution of this first, when the accident of embolism is of long duration you must give restoration of the limb: recipe of broth of elderberry and linseed seeds, of beeswax, meadowsweet, violets, chamomile, of all things departed and oil; all are triturated and are comfortable with water of broth or water of any kind or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Hippocrates does not say that it is to be left free that it is paused over the limb except that certain fat is done from wax and oil and not otherwise; and it is recommended that it be more moderate between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	More frequently it is seen that it is paused over the fractured limb except for the restoration of it and the causes in which it is excessive cold or slight heat so as to be like those which we have recommended
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manner of dressing that gives comfort to the lesion and pain: recipe of mustard, of rue, of pounded fennel seeds or penalty of vinegar, of elderberry, salt, parts of oil; all are triturated and sieved and are comfortable, and be useful dressing.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	More the quantity according to which you must keep the ligature and nearby should be disliked, is that you consider if there is not excessive pain or swelling or the bone is not fractured it is not bad that it is so.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if by chance to the area pain or swelling or inflammation occurs, the hours you must cover or remove that in the hour, and keep the dressing of it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take sponge of lint and marine sponge soaked in warm water, and put that in water warm, and at that bathe the area until the swelling and pain cease; and then remove the dressing from it for an hour; and then put over it a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or olive oil, and bind over it for a night until you are sure of the cessation of embolism, and that the swelling of the limb is diminished, and that the pain of it is relieved
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with that stricture little and do not tighten it for your first constriction, and submit to that until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes embolism and swelling and pain and inflammation and all these accidents already are relieved of all, and digestion of dressing and constriction is recommended, the hours you must do the same as you did at the beginning of healing.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause has happened to the limb of which we have said, the hours you must not remove it until three or four or five or seven days have passed and some say that all that is left is left for xx days according to your habit for the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and when the coagulacion of the marrow over that has taken place.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And the hours you must adjust in the stricture more than in your first stricture throughout, and adjust in the digestion of the food of the patient, as it is preceded by the memory of it
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More if sometimes the area of the fracture is already dry and swollen more than not to cover it, the hours you must know that the food is prohibited from going to that; and therefore take from him warm water of the whole three days; and relieve the stricture a little, and for this operation go to the limb the food, and that is healed without any discomfort.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More than what the rest of the healers of the fracture of the limb do another time when not restored at the beginning, according to that which covers, and is restored according to crookedness, is an error according to their operation, and a great fear, and if it should be so, it would enlarge the ailments in those that are free and would worsen at that which is done.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen that anyone has done that, for it is more reasonable that it does not do it
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and the figures of them are diverse, and the causes are diverse, for any fracture is caused by percussion of space, and the percussion stops all the bone within the cavity, which is left by it, as in the wrist, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called buckle; or the space strikes any part of the bone, and strikes the marrow of it and does not pass the incision beyond the back of it; and this kind of fracture is called elevation absolute.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The pain of these two fractures is either great or slight, and from a fracture that is contracted or relaxed; the cause of these is percussion from a hard object or a fall on a stone.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is either penetrating, that is to say that it approaches the bone, or on the face of the bone; and the pain of these two fractures is either great or slight.</end_of_turn>
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	Or the fracture is that which is hidden in the bone, in the marrow of the small bone, and for this reason this kind of fracture is called capillary.</end_of_turn>
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is caused by violence or by a fall or by percussion from a stone; this causes any lamina of the bone to enter the fragments, and is caused in the hollow part just as when stones are struck together and one fragment enters the fragments.</end_of_turn
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is mostly caused in the joints of humiferous bones, as in the knees.</end_of_turn>
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And in all these kinds of fractures that lie close together, they are like separated stars.</end_of_turn
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I must remind you of all this that is in this place.</end_of_turn>
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these kinds of fractures by recognition on them and by their signs and symptoms, and for the detection of corruption of the flesh that is over them.</end_of_turn>
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is known by this that it is discovered on the bone, and it is excised, and a tent is placed over it, so that the fracture is black.</end_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Moreover in the treatment of fractures one must take into consideration at the beginning the signs of the patient, and when sometimes for the signs that signify in meaning vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of consciousness, and vomiting of blood, and fainting, and fever, and immediately from these symptoms, as well as from the greater part of the symptoms, the physician must not be negligent.</end_of_turn
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if sometimes serious accidents do not threaten your life, the hour you begin to treat them.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause is that if it is verified at the beginning like verified and that it is in the days of winter, the hour you must study in the bone marrow from the thirteenth day according to all ability.</end_of_turn
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, the hour you must hide the bone from the seventh day, having observed that what is left of the bone is corrupted from the marrow, and that these accidents have been recommended.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the marrow covering the brain, and is contracted or relaxed, the hour you must suture the smaller fragments and the fracture, as I have recommended to you.</end_of_turn
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you take hold of the head of the patient that is affected, and uncover the bone according to custom and handle it as you are able according to the figure of the wound, and that you are curious about the patient.</end_of_turn
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you must detect the bone, flux of ointment or caustic paste, the hour you oppose it by that which covers it, and that you cover the area with cloths soaked in wine and oil, and make the wound rest until the paste has subsided; and make sure that there is flux of ointment; and begin immediately in the surrounding area of the bone and in the incision of the bone.</end_of_turn
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to two methods of operating.</end_of_turn
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one of the methods is that you cut the bone with a straight incision, and this is the form of it: And then you administer another incision, a little wider than the first; and this is the form of it.</end_of_turn
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And you administer more of the wider incision than the first.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And cover that you must give your name of various incisions, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are longer than others and are at the end of the slope of their extremities, and are of iron or steel.</end_of_turn
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to facilitate percussion on the incision so that it does not burst the head and lead to that.</end_of_turn
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, the hour you must perforate in the circuit of it before you administer the incisions, which are called non-penetrating incisions.</end_of_turn
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus except that those do not stop the end of the bone until it is close to it, for the puncture is round at the extremity or margin over that which is left the head of it appearing like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing the spissitude of the bone.</end_of_turn
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is appropriate that you take a great number of these travels, for each one will be convenient in every test of the brain and the extremity that is acute, as regards its length and shortness, is according to the quantity of spiciness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the way of three types of travels: the quality of boring through the broken bone circuit is that you stop the travel over the bone and rotate that which is between the toes until you know that the bone has already been pierced; and then change the travel to another location and stop when there is between all the quantity of the thickness of the ray or send it away.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the needle at the level of each break of the bone, and make that pus more subtle than you would over what is in the end of floating, as we have said, until you have eradicated the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause of these movements that are appropriate to it, as for example, nails and delicate forceps
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And that you take care that the needle does not touch any cause of swelling
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus when the bone is pierced by the circuit, and if it is separated from the swelling if it is prolonged with it, then extract that and cover that with the roughness of that in the bone like the other injury resembling the incision, but nevertheless cover that it is more soft and subtle than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there remain any small parts of the bones and fragments, then take that which facilitates you from the injuries; and then take care of the wound with lint and ointment as we have said
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operating is light, long, which says: dissect Gualia and the lauzec for a great surgeon; and this is the saying of them: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to discover the part of the bone of the place where the fracture is the most acute and most obvious, until when you have discovered that part and you have stopped leaving that extremity of the incision calm, this is the way:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the blunt part is round and does not touch any cause, and the acute part is from it on two sides forward in length, as sometimes; that the blunt part is adjusted to the swelling with the face of the acute incision on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then pierce over the incision with a little mallet so that you can rotate all the bone easily as well as that which is rotated, and you will be sure of the safety that it does not happen by chance in any way, and if the physician is the most learned of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there remains any accessory cause connected to the bone of the area of the incision, puncture that which is at the extremity of the incision that is blunt, and drain that which is facilitated, which is drained by day and by night.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate inside the cavity, and what is broken or remains of the bone is the face of it, and remains in the roughness and fragments, then take that you have covered that roughness and eradicated those fragments with subtle reasons for the number you have prepared, of various quantities so that you can manage to administer them in all places the most convenient for them and the most safe for them according to what you lose in your operation that broken bone and its shape
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And take care that you administer at your ratio as many of these reasons as those reasons for the bone at the beginning of the most liquid of those reasons, and then use more of the soft pus than the hard, and do not stop until you have administered the most liquid and the soft of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Moreover in any other small fractures capillaries and slight fracture, take care that you administer with care according to what you lose for the rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is known to all that has been studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And so we have shown in great fractures
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the cavity is rectangular when you have eradicated the bone, then take hold of it by the quantity of the wound, and immerse that in olive oil, and place that over the orifice of the wound; and take another sponge doubled or tripled and immerse it in wine and olive oil and place that over the sponge first and make the pus come out willingly that comes over that, that it does not harm the swelling; and then administer over that bandage lateral, and do not tighten that until the wound is only as wide as the wound alone
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that in this care for a day or two until you are sure that the wound has healed; and then remove that and administer medicines which are superfluous such as vinegar and barley flour, and powder of alum and of surgery, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	The disease of gout is caused by cold humors that penetrate every part of the body. When pain occurs in the feet, doctors usually call it gout.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Follow your skill in treating the disease so that the plague in your care does not become worse; do not add any violence to it, nor let anyone be arrogant or malicious; for when it is applied to the root of the disease, it corrupts that and brings about its downfall, and brings harm to the patient at the same time.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	When applied to the head, as is when bones are softened and the disease is less severe, it is black on the surface of the head; therefore consider that if it causes harm to the patient, the same applies when applied to the body, as it is perilous in every way
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not cause blackening of the medicine that is being used, but only from the medicine itself, know that it is in virtue of that medicine that produces that blackness; therefore take a little of the medicine and mix it with three parts of olive oil and mix with these lines a salve, and place that over the head; and care for that which is appropriate for the treatment that you consider suitable for recovery.</end_turn>
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.</end_turn>
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not fractured but merely bent downwards, or one of the two bones is slightly displaced, so that there are two bones remaining, of which one is cartilaginous and is not fractured, but is swollen and painful, without fracture.</end_turn
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	May be one of the two bones is fractured, however, know that you must insert a little of the aforementioned unguent into the ditch of the nose, and soften that fracture as much as possible, and as much as the force of the fracture allows, until the nose returns to its natural shape.</end_turn
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And be vigilant in this matter, and keep that you do not cause further pain to the patient during the operation.</end_turn
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the more prominent part of the nose, and you say that it is not so, know that it is equal to the tip of the ray in which the thickness is small.</end_turn
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two bones, do the same for them.</end_turn
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Close the restoration of the nose in the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, keep it still for six days or until the swelling has subsided.</end_turn
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And put on the tip of the nose a plaster bandage, if the fracture is in one part, or two caloses if the fracture is in two parts, and the thickness of the caloses should be such as to fill the cavity of the nose.</end_turn
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Tell the former restorers that the caloses must be bound on the edges and be changed every day, even if I am not told; because it must be covered with album soaked in warm water with powdered charcoal.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	There are some who say that the nostrils should be filled with lead instead of the caloses, for they are more flexible; and that the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the pain is not prohibited from inspiration.</end_turn
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; if you wish, do the one thing, or do the other.</end_turn
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another ointment is added to the ointment, plaster the nose with cerate or egg whites diluted in wine vinegar and olive oil, or with diaquilon.</end_turn
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If the ointment does not cause swelling, know that you must plaster the outside with flour of wheat and powdered lavender with wet album; and place a sponge over it, and do not put the nose in any way.</end_turn
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are fractured with a small fracture or broken, know that you must dissect over those, and extract those with instruments that are suitable for those; and close the incision, and care for that which encloses and consolidates, and plaster as convenient.</end_turn
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a plague inside the nose, know that you must care for that with caloses and administer lead canulas until it is completely healed.</end_turn
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.</end_turn
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	From restoration of the mandible when fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is fractured and the fracture is not displaced, recovery is quicker if the fracture is only slightly displaced, and is not completely fractured through and through, but is bent outwards at the edges
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth; in the same way, if the fracture is on the left side, insert the index finger of the right hand; and press on both sides of the fracture outwards at the same time, with your other hand on the opposite side of the fracture
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jawbone has already been separated into two, cover that you administer extension of two parts according to the rule until it is possible to equal them
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is movement of teeth with disruption, cover those that you expect to remain fixed with gold or silver or ivory; and place your hand over the fractured jawbone close to the ear, and place your hand over the duplicated tooth, and place your hand over the great wisdom tooth appropriately made, or a piece of cloth equal in length to the jaw; and tie that away as much as is necessary for the application to take effect, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the patient to rest and tranquility, and abstain from eating spicy foods
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you see that the figure has already been altered in any way, cover that you will remove it on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and plaster over it with powdered meal, with egg white, or with oatmeal, because you must not leave it open, and place your hand over the plaster bandage
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when the annex is fixed and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it in peace, do not remove it until it is healed and strengthen the fracture; for many people see this fracture stretched in three months.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another person comes with a subsequent swelling after this, cover that you must do what we have said about the treatment in the quiet of the place until it is healed, and remove that swelling
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is displaced, cover that you must consider if it is a fracture of the separated bone or saturages, cover that you must order the removal of those saturages when convenient for the disappearance of those from the pangs.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound of the fracture is wide, cover that you must widen it with the flebotomy according to the quantity of your need
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finished removing those saturages, and of those you will not remove, cover that you must close the wound of the fracture if it is wide; and if not, place your hand over one of the bandages that you consider convenient and secure that.
Capitol .v.	End of Document
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	From restoration of the jaw when fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the jawbone is fractured on the side of the teeth towards the back of the mouth due to the muscle, and that fracture is caused by one of three things.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Or it is fractured, or separated, or it is separated into two parts without causing saturages; and it is necessary for the restoration of it; or it is that there has been a displacement of saturages, and it is difficult to restore it; or that the fracture is wide
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is wide, is that you must have two assistants, so that one can hold the fractured jaw and the other can extend the cheek of that side
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And cover the fracture with the index fingers until the shape is restored according to what we have said, neither too taut nor too concave
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you order more extension, cover that you must stop leaving the patient's chin on the edge of the table or on the table, and be the size of it according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the jaw and cover the wound with your hand until you have closed the fracture as we have said
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you are unable to withdraw the jawbone to the outside, in order to reach the root, cover that the patient should be supine on his neck, and place your hand over the muscle of his face on one side.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister will draw the muscle of the face towards the outside until the jawbone is elevated more than it is in the root, and then you will rectify the fracture and cover it with the index fingers
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Even if there are saturages of the jaw and these are soft, cover that you must work over that and extract those saturages easily
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then you generate incision of it with one of the instruments which you have prepared for this, because you had left behind the spur that served the scapula; and that spur is of bone or iron of which this is the form.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is similar to the one of which this is the cavity; and its breadth as much as you need it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of it be as much as is possible for the operation; that there be two extremities thus sometimes, and one broad and the other narrow
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the membrane which you have incised when you have extracted the marrow from the bone is wide, and you are sure of the haemostasis, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is slight, or you fear haemostasis, then you use the wound with gauze and powder according to the extent of the wound
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if haemostasis fails, then immerse the wound in wine vinegar and olive oil and wine, and rest upon it
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the stiffness of the bone when its wound is closed and its section is complete, be that you place a plaster cast of wheat flour and egg white, and place your hand over it, stop the bleeding that may arise from that, and take away any feeling of tingling from it, if you perceive it, and take nourishment, for it is the one that the Sarrazins have, which is neither too long nor too short; and place powder doubled over the cast and the plaster; and take a splint of oak about three fingers wide and as long as the wound; and encase this in wax, and encase that wax on the area over the fracture; and take nourishment in this way as long as is required, and turn that over the ankle and let the tingling of the foot and the pain of the disease cease, and reduce that over the whole part, and when the stiffness of the fracture is at the stiffness that is not perceptible to you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And indeed, that the splint should not be left on the fractured bone; and so that you see the patient every day, because when the ligament is softened or the splint is already remoulded, then you must rectify that and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And so keep the patient still on the foot, and keep the tingling of the foot from disturbing him during the night, putting a small cushion under his foot; for so will be elevated the assistant of the foot from the heel of the foot to the elevation of the scapula; or that the arm of the foot is bound to the heel of the foot.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the bandage if there is no bleeding or haematoma, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And so renew the plaster if you have seen the face of the wound to it, and adjust in the stiffness and restore that and leave until it is restored and the fracture of the scapula is consolidated
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in xxviii days, and a few days in some homes is sufficient in the month of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of the fracture of the scapula.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scapula is fractured in the lateral part of the bone and is not fractured from the bone except for the margins
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is fractured in the middle of the bone – and it is fractured in the middle of the bone – and is not known except by touch, then according as the figure of the fracture forces you to prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every way that is possible to you
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And so keep over the area powdered wheat flour and egg white and stop bleeding; and keep double powder of wax; and keep over that a splint of oak about the whole extent of the spatula or more if necessary
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May the hole left by the scapula be concaved in some of the parts of the spatula, then you englobe that concavity with a stop of lion, and put the splint equal to the height of the scapula
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And so strengthen from below with nourishment long enough with constriction downward and with support of the splint until it is not remoulded from the marrow of the bone
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament every day; and whenever it is softened, leave another day and strengthen it and equal the splint to the height of the scapula if it is remoulded from the marrow of the bone
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient still on the lateral side of his foot
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The scapula is restored in xx days or in .xxv
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Therefore, when this number has been completed, you dissolve the ligament, and you know with certainty that that which originates from the bones from which you began will not be feared or dissolved.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the area of the heel and put down the tendon, then you split over it, and leave it, and do as we have said concerning the fracture of the collarbone after excision of the cartilage of the heel
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.</end_of_turn>
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	When several veins are cut in the middle of the foot and these are somewhat torn; however, the extremities of the foot must not be torn so that they are cicatrized and diminished.</end_of_turn
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And concerning the accidents of these veins when the middle of the foot is fractured, that it declines to the surrounding parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, sneezing, vomiting, and strong pain; and is declared in the cavity of the fractured bone and is not hidden from the feeling.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of these is that you rest the patient on his side, and put between his buttocks a cushion; and immediately bind the muscles of the foot, and adjust the ribs of the foot to the greatest of two ribs, and bring together the lower part of the body in the operation of the foot and in the equalization as much as is possible and as is convenient, until you have returned the limb to its normal position.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And immediately pause on the plaster and bandage and pause over the wound a soft cushion of gauze or cloth and keep them in suspension; for you must cover that with a bandage. And immediately bind that over the fractured bone so that it is not painful; and keep that bind tight without being too tight. And consider the bind always, and when it is softened, tighten that one again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary to provoke a loosening of that you must perform excision or drainage or pain, or swelling that occurs in the area, then you cover it and remove that bandage and remove the plaster and rectify what has happened in that way; and immediately reduce the plaster, sometimes up to the face; and adjust the bind until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the vertebrae when they are fractured.</end_of_turn
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You must know that a fracture of the vertebrae does not cause paralysis except in the places where two lie together; and concerning the extremities of the parts from the front do not cause to those behind except for the fact that the cartilaginous ones are fractured.</end_of_turn
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And as for the recognition of these it is not hidden from the feeling, you must inquire about it from those who know.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is just as much as embraces the fracture as said above, except that it is embraced as much as is possible, and immediately plaster and strengthen the fractured bone with a splint, if it does not impede that.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the vertebrae declines to the surrounding parts it causes acute pain and puncture, just like a puncture that occurs to that which has pleuracy, and for that reason it puts the bone in a limp; and it causes difficulty in walking, sneezing, vomiting quite seriously; and this is of difficult healing.</end_of_turn
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the ancients have invented in that way that does not move.</end_of_turn
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them it is said: cover that you feed the patient of the disease that caused inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is flattened and extended, and the fracture is not hindered by the parts outside.</end_of_turn
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	However we must beware of that so that it does not be the cause of generating further swelling by means of the cautery, if not to happen; and if it has already happened, the hour has already helped to that.</end_of_turn
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And I say to you that it is stopped without wind and that you should make it with force; and it is like reasoning, however, it is feared that the wind will tear the parts to the area for the fracture.</end_of_turn
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And I say to you: cover that the area be covered with wool that has already been immersed in oil caut, and stay powdered between the vertebrae until it is full, that the bind be equal when you wrap that up according to the retuning; and immediately cure the patient of the disease with food and medicine.</end_of_turn
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes acute constriction of the patient that does not suffer from it, and puts the bone in a limp with puncture, you must take care of the patient, for the hour covers that they should break over the area, uncover the fractured edge, and immediately stop that instrument that is retained, remembering that which is preceded is followed, and that it facilitates the bone, and extract that.</end_of_turn
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And thus we shall adjust the two lips of the plague, if it is great, with pressure, and we shall care for that which is not plastered until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it happens that the swelling is deep, then thou shalt uncover and bathe the area with oil of roses and place your hand over the place, and that the patient be cured by the warmth which covers the swelling deep
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let the patient rest upon the side on which he sleeps, until he is healed
Capitol .ix.	End of session.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Restoration of the fracture of the vertebra of the two and of the tailbone.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Certain wounds cause fracture to the bones of the tailbone, and the treatment is to leave them alone, and to be similar to the vertebrae of the two
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such things happen to some people and one wishes to know if he is healed or not, then consider that sometimes the limbs are already softened and relaxed and softened and dead and one cannot make them move or extend or flex them, and when you constrain them with tight bands or pierce them with needles and they do not feel pain in them, then you know that he is not healed, and in such a state of affairs it is deadly.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you make them move and press in their constriction with bands or pierce them, then you know that the bone is saved and that the disease will be healed with care
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the tailbone like this and you wish to know if he is healed or not, then consider the feet of the patient
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if sometimes they are already softened, this happens in the most serious cases, and when he lies over the two thighs, he is unable to urinate, and many times he is found resting over the two thighs and is unable to urinate, then you know that it is deadly, and do not work on his care
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	Maybe if no other cause of these exists, the cause is better and lighter
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the care of them is that you perforate the swelling with the cautery and that you place over the vertebra which is fractured oil of roses alone, or with soft sponges of wax; and place over that anyone who has seen a wound to give him until the swelling is reduced.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And let one of the attendants loosen one of the plaster supports which exist and hold over that which is fractured; and command the patient to rest and be tranquil and not to sleep on the side on which he feels pain until he is healed
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the swelling arises from the sacrum or any other cause that has already been separated from it, then you must cover that area with a dressing and support that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the plague, with sutures if it is great; and take care of that which is not plastered until it is healed
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Maybe if the heel bone is fractured and the end of the limb is stiff, then you must put your left hand on the buttock and grasp the fractured bone with the other hand as well as is possible; and then support over that plaster and bandage, if you think it necessary; and hold that position
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if the sacrum is fractured in them, then you must sit over that, and hold that, and take care of the plague with the care which is proper until it is healed
Capitol .x.	End of session.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Restoration of the limb
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the limb have become fractured, and if they break, then the fracture of them is nothing but a communication in the extremities of those and are inscribed in the length and decline to the inward; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the limb is stupefied when it is fractured
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over that which is over the fracture which is like the figure of it
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the limb, then you must grasp that as it is appropriate until it is reassembled to its natural figure
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Maybe if the fracture is in the middle or that it already declines to the inward of the thighs, then you must make the patient lie on his belly until he is prepared for the restoration of that fracture
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when that has been grasped, support over that plaster, and hold over that bandage of cloth or bandage, and hold firmly over that which you fear puncture of fracture or loosening of the staple.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And grasp the cavity with oil which is under that which supports the staple according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on the two thighs or to rest on the side of the wound
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May it be that if an apoplexy occurs due to the cautery, cease the extension of the limb and its restoration until the apoplexy has subsided; then rest upon it what is necessary until that which precedes it has passed away; and then return to the restoration of the limb, and strengthen it as before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the heel bones or are crumbled, then treat them as well
Capitol .xi.	Chapter eleven
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adjuvant bone
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjuvant is that which is between the hip bone and the head of the femur
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, the restoration of it is in two ways, of which one is to take half of the great trochanter by this method:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And join at two extremities two ligaments, and suspend it from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient upon a cushion; and put the fractured limb outside over the hip until it reaches the nail of the limb at the middle place where the curvature of the limb is attached
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if there is any other serious cause, or a minor extend the limb to the lower parts; and the doctor should keep the fracture firm in the joints until the fracture returns as it should
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way is that the patient be supine on the cervical spine and suspend the limb from the collarbone; and command two assistants to take hold of what is below the fracture on their sides; and the other to hold the legs; and whichever of them extends to their part
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with the ligament and over that with the other ligament, and whichever of the two assistants extends to two of their parts
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, cover that half of the ligament over the nail and the other leave the fracture outside the hipbone
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly if the fracture is close to the hipbone, cover that half of the ligament over that place and over that hipbone
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Moisturize what is facilitated and work thus; and when it has been moistened as it should be according to the cover and the application, then strengthen that which does not cause an apoplexy after the cautery.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	May it be that if an apoplexy occurs due to the cautery, leave the restriction until the seventh day, and rest upon it a soft bandage soaked in vinegar and olive oil until the apoplexy has subsided, and then strengthen that again
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The way to strengthen that is to put on a plaster cast over the fracture, and then put on a bandage of lint over the plaster cast; and adjust the arm over that adjuvant and put your open hand over the thigh muscle
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And rest the limb and strengthen over the adjuvant the arm so that the arm is in place without hindering any other cause of the fractured bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use crutches
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And rest upon the fracture that which is stronger and firmer than the others; and rest between each stick the width of a finger, and the length of the sticks according to the fracture in addition to three fingers from the whole part
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And strengthen over the sticks at the restriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your restriction over the place of the fracture be more straight
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more prolonged, the restriction should be less strong
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Therefore if sometimes the position of the sticks and the restriction as we have said at the hour when you restore the limb to its usual position, then do so
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an apoplexy due to the cautery, then leave the restriction and the sticks until the seventh day as we have said before
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place of bruising or swelling; or it is prohibited to feed the limb to prevent excess stiffness; and therefore rectify all that has been said above
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May it be that if you are confident that no other cause will occur, do not remove the bandage until three days or more have passed
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient rest on the side of the patient two, and the greater parts over the stomach
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Pause over the injured limb completely covered in fat, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not swollen or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, therefore rectify all of this with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Pause the food of the patient according to the order which we have given before, namely that the food should be subtle at the beginning until it is well chewed; and that the time that has elapsed since the food was eaten should be covered
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the custom of the attendants and the chambermaid, it is that they should be strong for forty days; and that the time that has elapsed since their last meal should be covered by bathing and medication, which correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is late, then do not delay with the ligament and the bones for a day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	(The provided text does not contain any further content after this point.)</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Restoration of forearm fracture.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The forearm consists of two bones which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the one is small, and that is that which is called the thumb, and the other is large and that is that which is grasped from behind the thumb, from the part beyond the thumb
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it is strong that only the large or the small bone is fractured, or that both are fractured together
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small bone is fractured, then the restoration of it is light, and the healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large bone is fractured behind the thumb, the fracture is bad, and the healing is difficult
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worse of all is when both bones are fractured together
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the small one outside, it is convenient for the doctor to delay the restoration, that is to say, to keep the small extension facilitated until that which has been fractured is healed
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	Even if the large bone is fractured, it is necessary to keep the extension still more violent
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured together, it is necessary to keep the movement of the limb still more strong
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must keep the figure of the hand still during the restoration of the limb and the extension of the limb supported on a cushion, and that the thumb should be lower than the other fingers, and the patient should be placed in the center of the cushion
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And give the patient a cushion under the arm or the side of the limb, so that the patient does not suffer pain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the attendants extend the arm from the part beyond the thumb with the right hand or the ligament, and another attendant extends the rest of the limb like that
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should join the bone as soon as possible, until it has returned to its normal position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is swelling of the bone, then you must perforate the whole area of the wound with your skill
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate swelling that does not please you with the restoration of the limb, then you must take it out and remain with it as we have said before
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	And if the fracture is in the palm of the hand, I have already spoken about this particular case, and therefore take care of that
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if by chance you should happen to burn the cautery at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line up a bandage around the wound with castor oil and white wax, and mix between spirits and subtlety, and stretch the bandage tightly over that which is stricture subtle until the burn is gone; and then keep the bandage and pause the plaster prepared from powdered rosin with clay and oil, and place the thumb; and let the thumb be stronger and stronger than before.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of bones in the forearm is six, or that the fracture is in one bone or in two bones together
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And keep your stricture tight over the fracture site more strongly and more violently, and when more if you withdraw the stricture from the upper parts of the fracture or from the lower parts of the limb, pause the stricture a little more soft than before according to the memory of the fracture from the beginning of this chapter
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that cover the fracture should be wet cloths, and should not be dry or rough, and the thread with which it is sutured should be neither too fine nor too thick, as we have recommended
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and the ligament for about a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If any other cause compels correction, immediately do the same for the member affected, and while you are doing so, cover the limb with warm water until the pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Keep the limb still until the swelling subsides, and then return the structure to its normal position.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the swelling has already been softened and the bone is already softened and similar to those, then restore everything to its original condition with your skill
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider whether nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive swelling, for in that case cover that until the swelling subsides, and then restore the nutrition to it again, and strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If no other cause of the aforementioned has occurred, then do not cause it to go away for about xx days or more
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And suspend the patient's hand from their movement with their skill, and let them sleep on their side two.</start_of_turn>
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Remember that this fracture is healed in xxx days or in xxxii days, or that the pain is completely healed in xxviii days, according to the characteristics of the condition and the ability of the physician.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and the fingers.</start_of_turn
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Remember that in the thumb and the fingers there is a break of the bone, and do not touch them except with soft moats.</start_of_turn
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the thumb is fractured or broken, or if there is a tear, then cover the patient so that they do not move, and keep their hand still over the extended limb.</start_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor joins them back together until they are well united with good adhesion.</start_of_turn
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And keep the plaster still and stop, if necessary; do not do so carelessly; and keep the bandage still according to the amount of the wound, and you have already covered that with linen.</start_of_turn
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the palm of the hand, you must hold the palm of the hand from moving, and order the patient to strengthen that which has been fractured; strengthen it with a long bandage.</start_of_turn
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And keep the limb resting on the bandage in which it is lifted, so that the limb is applied to the palm; and strengthen it as much as is necessary.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outside of the limb, then keep the limb still from the outside and another from the inside of the palm, so that the hand is open and extended; and strengthen the structure, even if the hand is rotated between the fingers and the thumb.</start_of_turn
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture of some of the fingers, if it is said to be serious, keep it united as it should be, and strengthen it with the palm, and if you wish, bind the little finger tightly so that the fracture is elevated and not crushed.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the ring, middle, index, or thumb, keep them united and bound together as a whole; or bind them all together in sequence, which is better; or keep them bound over that little bandage as we have said before.</start_of_turn
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your restoration, and do that which opposes the use of excessive heat and cold — in other words, with your surgical operation — with what is covered when any cause of the aforementioned has occurred, as is repeated in the narration.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone.</start_of_turn
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is broken with soft moats, and is declared to be converted to the front part and to the greater trochanter.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is made so that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament of the outside of the fracture, and the patient is placed prone on the belly and on the face.</start_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.</start_of_turn
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is at the hip, then keep the ligament of the trochanter to the pubic bone at the fifth space, so that the limb is extended, and the other ligament of the outside of the fracture.</start_of_turn
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the fracture is close to the nail, then it is necessary to ligate the fracture close to the nail, and extend the fracture to the lower parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor should gently move the limb both above and below until the fracture is reduced according to its natural conformation; then cover with a bandage and keep it still, unless an accident happens to the limb later
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If an accident happens to it later, then leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides, and then return to your care
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage of the fracture should be tight: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and bend the limb two or three times, and remove excess air; and then cover the limb until it reaches the ankle and the heel of the foot
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long thread between the thigh and the foot near the nail, and bring the ends of the thread over the limb above and below the fracture, and tie a knot over the limb and the thigh as much as the bandage allows
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And keep your thigh still at the level of the fracture, and place a splint over the limb of the fracture
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the space between the limb and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the swelling is absorbed
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And start to tighten the bandage firmly around the area of the fracture with three wraps or four, and when you have advanced around the fracture site, reduce the tightening and make it lighter and softer
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend the two ends of the thread to the lower parts until it reaches the ankle, and strengthen both ends of the nails on the other side so that the nail is not pulled out of place
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And keep the limb still in this way, so that no accident happens to the limb during healing or swelling does not occur or that the fracture does not worsen; and if any of these things happen, immediately suspend the treatment and rectify what has happened as soon as possible, as we have said before
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is very painful, then it is necessary to ligate that as soon as possible; and if not, leave it alone and care for what has happened before, until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	The doctor should adjust the fracture of the thigh so that it is aligned with the nails, as we have said in the instructions and in the book.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the limb in this way does not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, without applying the other bandage, it is necessary that the other limb be clamped as well
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	Remember that the thigh is strengthened in thirty days or a few months or a few weeks, according to the diversity of the conditions and the other provisions
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Remember that the fracture of the thigh bone is often delayed, but it does not happen without the application of these cloths externally.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If an accident happens to the fracture, it is not anything more than a fissure or crack in the limb, and this is accompanied by swelling or bruising, and about this one must be silent
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the limb is when it is ligated as much as is possible so that it is reunited and joined as soon as possible for the greatest ease and comfort and convenience.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And keep the plaster and the round splint still, if you wish; and strengthen the bandage as much as is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Consider all the precautions that we have recommended in other fractures, such as swelling and keeping things still, which is what is most convenient until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the limb.</end_of_turn
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Remember that in the limb there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the limb; and the other is thin and is called the bone.</end_of_turn
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	The same thing happens with the various types of fractures that occur in both bones of the limb, and for this reason the restoration of the limb is as much as possible like the restoration of the limb itself, and the operation is one.</end_of_turn
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If two bones are fractured together, the limb is converted into its entirety.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If two bones are fractured together, the limb is converted into its entirety.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If two bones are fractured together, the limb is converted into its entirety. The other limb is usually affected, and this is the cause of your pain.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And give extension, equilibrium and ligature of the bones according to that equilibrium
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Moreover, if the fracture of the limb is slight without having soft swelling, make the extension milder and lighter, and relieve with your skill.</start_of_turn>
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the limb is any cause of operation on the hand, and it is when you have gathered the fragments and when you have completed your surgical work, then you will take pins of glass from the foot which is placed outside the causes which are placed inside, and so make them sufficient but not excessive; give them the size that suits the limb, and from the nail inwards.</start_of_turn>
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And cover with two covers each part according to its length, and place one over the part of the limb from one side and the other over the part of the limb from the other side, and so from the nail inwards of the foot.</start_of_turn
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And tie the two fragments in three places at the two extremities and in the middle part, so that the limb is prohibited from leaning to the right and left, and remains in a good position.</start_of_turn
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a bandage of glass is administered according to the length of the limb; and keep the limb still in it so that it conserves that movement.</start_of_turn
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	More importantly, cover what is fractured well, and when that is properly placed.</start_of_turn
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider in every day the limb and study it thoroughly, and you will keep it free from after-effects and from inflammation or other causes similar; and when these things happen, then remove the bandage until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn>
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.</start_of_turn
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not often suffer fracture; however, some fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and the toes rarely fracture, and they do so only when their situation is unfavorable.</start_of_turn
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and sometimes when these bones must be elevated between them, then you must put the foot on the ground prepared as when going out.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And put a foot on what is elevated from those bones, and then chalk them, and press and bind them until they are healed in the places.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And put on plaster and stop discharge, and keep the belly of the foot a little wider than the two caps of glass.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that which has been straightened, because you have covered that with bandage and other causes which you do not indicate.</start_of_turn
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will remove the bandage, because you will find the bones healed, or fractured or dislocated, and the operation in these is like that of a cunning man.</start_of_turn
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	Moreover, if some of the toes are fractured, then restore these and bind them as before.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And keep the fractured toe steady according to the length of the toe, and make it a little wider; and keep the foot on this table which has been recommended to you, and strengthen that which has been straightened downwards.</start_of_turn
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	Moreover, if there are two or three or more fractures, then you must keep each toe still according to its quantity covered in soft leather, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the ends of the table to keep the foot in good retention.</start_of_turn
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you to know that you have not mentioned all the causes which we have said to you in the other accidents which we have mentioned; and take care of any accident which may occur to you while you are covering.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the heel of the femur and the bone of the patella and the groove of the heel.</start>
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, then the pain ceases in its usual place and it inclines towards the part two inches below the knee.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	When the thigh bone is fractured, then the mother must fill the thigh with wine; and make a point on the thigh in the same way as before; and elevate the two little bones below until all that is outside is forgotten until the part of the thigh which is below the knee has returned to its normal place.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place powder on the two little bones, and when you wish to urinate, the cushion is facilitated and the urine will flow; and reduce and return that which was previously mentioned according to the manner in which it was commenced, and place the powder away once more.</end_of_turn>
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or until recovery occurs.</end_of_turn>
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	Or if you wish, take once of vinegar and strengthen over the knee a tube of sponge; and draw out all the urine from the bladder into the thigh, and then close the tube so that the bladder is compressed until the fracture returns.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the thigh filled with wine for several days as we have recommended, until recovery.</end_of_turn>
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the thigh bone or the shin bone is fractured, then administer in the restoration and swelling of them the things that we have recommended for the ankle bone.</end_of_turn>
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is hidden in these primary fractures is not concealed in them and little debt is to be expected, mostly to that one to whom it is some study and who understands this book well; for that fracture means to you in the greatest possibilities of restoration and stricture of them, and therefore understand well.</end_of_turn>
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	More when the thigh is fractured, take vinegar and mustard, and put the mustard in that; and put a cover over them and cover them, and keep it covered for three days or until recovery occurs, and be healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of fractures of the bones when swelling is present.</end_of_turn
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient in that to which an accident of fracture with swelling has happened, and more so if the bone is great as for example the bone of the thigh or the bone of the forearm, or is similar to these, that you take care of it and apply poultices to it as much as possible even if the symptoms of inflammation are at your ease or as they are reported to you.</end_of_turn
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling subsides, cover that you keep to the retention of the liquid which you have powdered over it if for another reason it is not present.</end_of_turn
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And begin to restore the fracture in that way on the eighth day, and do not prolong it, if not after an apostem.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	More if an apostem occurs, then leave the restoration of them until the ninth day, until the apostem has subsided, and do not approach them on the third day and the fourth of the whole thing, for you will make them happen worse.</end_of_turn
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	More if the fractured bone is prominent over the knee, cover that you perforate to reduce it and equalize it with your hands as much as possible and with little extension.</end_of_turn
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	More if the extension is not prepared for you and the equilibrium of them with your thighs is not at your convenience, then you reduce that with your hands as much as possible and with little discomfort; and that discomfort is useful for iron, the length of which is seven inches or eight and the width is according to the quantity of the swelling; and for this it is necessary for the physician to take into consideration these three or four things according to the quantity that you indicate in the treatment of every kind of fracture.</end_of_turn
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And be round, and be in little height so that it is not doubled over by the pressure in the time of the operation.</end_of_turn
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And be of acute extremity to which it is close in the limbs; and be the distance from it to the great toe bent, and from the middle to the heel.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of them.</end_of_turn
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek “labre volentz atelarem”, so it is little pale.</end_of_turn
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For that cover that the acute extremity is raised over the prominent limb.</end_of_turn
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And put it in a bandage until the bone returns, and be equalized with any equilibrium.</end_of_turn
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore strive to stabilize the fractured limb between them, and if the limb is fractured slightly and does not cause them undue discomfort, then it is sufficient to insert the limb into the surrounding tissue that has the power to hold it in place.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Even if you are unable to reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, it is sufficient to suffice with that which covers the injuries from the surrounding tissues which we have mentioned; or bind that with one of the nails in any way that you are able.</end_of_turn>
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And take away that which remains in the bone of swelling and small wounds.</end_of_turn>
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences severe pain, it is known that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; whereupon you must do what you can to comfort the patient greatly.</end_of_turn
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When the restoration of the limb is complete, which is done to the bone, then immerse the wound in black vinegar, especially if it is summer, and do not put any oil on the wound, for this causes it to soften and decay.</end_of_turn
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And immediately administer sponges at the time of eating in addition to the restoration of the limb, and leave the wound uncovered until the wound has been closed with sutures and dressing as required according to the extent of the wound.</end_of_turn
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be very careful not to strain the wound at the fracture, for this is what often causes the physicians to lose their patients, and it will cause great suffering to the patient if it is delayed or if it is done carelessly.</end_of_turn
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the fracture is slight and soft, unlike the fracture of other bones.</end_of_turn>
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or if there is suspicion of a severe accident to those bones which we have recommended, and if there is pain in the area, then do not put on any sutures, but rather apply a bandage of fine cloth in place of the sutures and tighten it around them.</end_of_turn
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When two or three days have passed since the wound began to heal, if there is swelling in it, then remove the vinegar which you had placed on it, and administer calamine, which is customary for healing wounds, along with any other medications that you deem appropriate.</end_of_turn
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Advise the patient to keep the limb still and consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and that the limb is prepared in such a way that the swelling subsides from it to the lower parts without difficulty.</end_of_turn
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days have passed since the wound appeared and it is neither consolidated nor has it been evacuated, then it is known that there is a delay in healing and that the wound should be treated with attention.</end>
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And if those delays which are separated remain and are extruded, those which are not separated and cause the limb to swell and cause pain, you must order that they be excised as soon as possible.</end>
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If gangrene or decay occurs in the wound, this is a sign of severe infection, or other kind of corruption and decay, and in such a case you must immediately suspend any treatment which has preceded this narration in the capital.</end>
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And if the limb is grossly fractured, examine the limb as you would the limb of a cripple or a helper, and take precautions as you would for the great limbs, and do not presume that the attraction of the limb will be enough, or that the extraction of the limb which often happens will not cause death; but rather leave it in place until it recovers naturally, which will take approximately twenty or thirty days.</end And if you are able to cure the wound, leave it alone; if not, leave it as it is.</end
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.</end>
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of swelling which occurs in the aftermath of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These swellings often accompany the healing of fractures, and are especially common in the vicinity of the joints, and often hinder the natural functioning of the limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider if the swelling is recent and administer medicines which have a constrictive action so that it is less painful, and look, and touch, and inspect the limb in every way, and if you see or feel anything abnormal, take some or all of them away, and mix them with vinegar or album of herbs, or with vinegar and oil, and cover the swelling with this until it subsides, and bind it tightly around it.</end_of_turn>
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the extraction until it has been at least a few days; and if you extract it, repeat the procedure until the swelling has disappeared; or bind the limb tightly with leaden tape, which has the property of reducing swelling in limbs.</end_of_turn
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that if he has already become petrified and stretched, and necessity compels him to cause pain in that manner, then split that part most sovereignly of him, and puncture the superfluous or eminent, or withdraw that which is at the root of the cause until it is remaugued; and care for that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	The provided text is in a medieval medical treatise written in a language that resembles Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is a translation:
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	In the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then immediately the limb should be kept flexible not following its natural movement.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has been restored, and then immediately the limb should be kept flexible, for in these cases there are several causes for this: one is the multitude of solution of the ligament and the tightening of the limb which has been made in vain; or for the excess of stricture of the ligaments that the nourishment is prohibited from running to the limb; or for the multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for an abnormal movement that is not in its time; or for the scarcity of health in the body of the patient and for the weakness of his limbs
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The care of this is to feed the patient and make him drink until his health is multiplied in him; to administer baths; and to give him poultices and let him know about them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And immediately put a bandage over the limb, so that the bandage does not obstruct the running of the nourishment, or continues to embrocate it with lukewarm water, until the nourishment returns to its natural figure
Capitol .xxii.	End of document.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the care of fractured bones when they are restored tortiously and prohibits the operation of them by means of liquid that covers them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When an accident happens to a limb that has already been restored, immediately restore its stability and remove any prominence of the fractured bone and nodulation, for this may cause the limb not to recover naturally, however it does not mean that you must refrain from any treatment for that limb just because it has been fractured before
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Indeed there are many fools among the doctors and restorers who have made use of us in our time; and this treatment is not without great fear, for the signal of which is mortal
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the swelling and nodulation are recent, then immediately bathe them in lukewarm water in which are dissolved many cooling herbs such as fennel and rue, marjoram, and chamomile; or apply a plaster with a soothing plaster such as that of gypsum; or that of olive oil with beeswax or honey, or that of lead and beeswax or pine resin, or that of fat and linseed oil and poppy seed, like those that are not foreign to the physician after consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And many times the swelling is dissolved with continuous rubbing of the limb that is even in the most humid seasons, and movement of the limb must be administered in every hour throughout the day
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the torsions have already gone down and force has been applied, and it has become petrified and is caused by necessity, care must be taken of it with iron, for the most part of the pus that is expelled from the nodule of that member must be dissolved, and the movement of the limb must be facilitated in that which the os is solicited and studied
Capitol .xxiii.	End of Document.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Concerning dislocation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any joint of the limb, because it is prohibited from movement, and causes deformity of the limb, and brings about great pain and lesions in the patient
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an accident of dislocation occurs, it must be treated as soon as possible so that it is reduced, and not to delay that reduction, for if it is delayed, the limb is apostematized and strong, and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to prevent this it must not be grasped or stretched at the time of reduction, for many herbs make spasm and pain worse
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When an accident happens, the limb must be kept calm and relaxed, and immediately put into a cold bath of oil and water; and must be reduced with the greatest possible ease
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all the limb must be treated with the water from which the memory will remain in its place
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to their order, from the most superior part of the body to the most inferior part
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Capital .xxiiii.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocadas the two mandibles if they are not held firmly; and dislocation of both is usual in two ways: that they are loosely fixed in their places by little movement, or that they are completely dislocated and complete, until they are softened at the juncture until saliva from the patient comes out of its mouth and does not wish to have that or to close its mouth, and its tongue is wrapped in its saliva
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	May be when the dislocation is slight, the hour in the greatest disposition returns by itself without much cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	May be if the dislocation is complete and complicated, the hour commands that it be urgently reduced, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor puts his thumb of his right hand on the root of the dislocation of the mandible in front of the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is of the right side; or that he puts his two thumbs together inside, if the dislocation is of both sides, and that the others say from the most of the patient that they are out of it; and commands the patient to stop his mandibles and hold those that do not touch; and the doctor grasps the mandible and covers the mandible until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are simultaneously dislocated, the hour administers evaporation with cold water and oil, until it is useful to lighten the reduction of both and not to delay the reduction of both for too long, as we have said
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And thus when they return and are softened, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, the hour pauses over those little threads of silk at the corners, and is useful with wax and oil rubbed; and it is placed so that it is fixed with ease.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his two thighs, and his head be between two cushions, so that neither side is hurt; and do not force him to do anything more; have the patient's bed be firm, until when the pains are relieved and the mandibles are well aligned, the hour may leave when it wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And what is administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the patient's mouth during eating and drinking and talking, until the mandible is relaxed and healed
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at any hour and is not converted to their normal places, the hour moves with haste fever and salt solution, and it is very urgent to be warned the patient's belly, and it is very strong and vomiting pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when it is repeated often, the hour knows that it is for loss; and it moves away from that to which it happened within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capital .xxv.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the breastbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The breastbone is not dislocated from the side because of its continuity with the feet; and some are dislocated at the far end, and that is known by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of them is that the patient grasps over the two thighs and extends his upper limbs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And immediately cover the area with your palm with strong pressure, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And immediately pause over that plaster and threads and hold that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of the limb that was previously bitten and is continued with that, not be dislocated at any time; the hour commands that it be reduced and softened as we have said and as you have said concerning your treatment
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And immediately pause over that plaster, threads and traction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this same method of treatment the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from the bone
Capitol .xxvi.	Capital .xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the heel to the toes
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from below the muscle, and that is useful; it is not dislocated at the back for the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front for the nerves
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The greatest displacement is that of the cartilages that are outside of their sockets, especially in those where the tissue is thin, and most of all in those where there are many bones, for it is outside with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often it happens by percussion or violent movement of the limb, and the muscle is relaxed from spasm, and it is corrected by that which already causes displacement
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	So that when you are going to lie down, take hold of the limb so that you do not grow careless in its care
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that displacement is when it is at the back of the knee; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and the normal muscle; for you will find among those differences the concavity of the muscle at the head and the prominence at the back of the knee, just as if there were a hole there, and the patient cannot withdraw his hand from the wound even if he wants to, nor can he bear any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is displaced from the toes or heel, and you see it manifested by touch, do not hide it.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this displacement is made a gentle reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises the limb to the back of the knee; and he places his thumbs behind the knee, and he raises the joint with force in their sockets, and the minister raises his hand, and extends the limb; and he pauses for a moment so that it returns naturally
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	More if in the beginning of the displacement, days have passed, the patient should be bathed in warm water and should be administered embrocation that softens and relaxes as if it were a salve of high quality, and rue, and chamomile in water, and should be administered
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And so the patient should be supported on the thighs and be kept from moving until the swelling has gone down between the levitations and the stiffness, and the doctor should place his hand on the head of the muscle and pull the patient's hand so that it is not bruised at the back, and another minister should hold the patient's head, so that it is not bruised at the back, for that too must return to the socket
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Or if you wish, you can reduce it in this way: and it is that you have another man present who is longer than the patient, and that he stands on that side, and you insert the knee of the limb behind the knee of the patient and elevate the thumb of the limb to the back of the knee until the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the back of the thigh.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is flexible, it is necessary that something else be suspended so that the displacement returns immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced easily in another way: and it is that a long staff is placed on the ground, the top of which is rounded like a mortar pestle, which is neither thick nor thin, and it is placed behind the patient; since when you place your hand over the top of the staff the patient's limb is stretched according to the length of the staff, and the other hand is stretched out from the other side with force, so that the joint returns to the socket quickly
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons we have said, the following treatment can be used: and you take a staff as long as two palms and as wide as four fingers, and its thickness is removed at the level of the tibia in this way:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And so you put around the rounded top some leather straps so that the staff does not bruise the patient
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And so the thumb or the arm is placed over the staff until it reaches the back, and the staff is bound over the attendants and the arms and the limb.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And so the arm is placed on a scale of a ladder according to the width, and the hand is stretched out to the back, and the other limb is suspended from the other side so that the joint is inside
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the limb is properly positioned according to any method that is convenient to you, and when you have placed a cushion of prepared powder of lead with egg album around all the muscles so that it is covered, and when you have stretched out the limb with force, and when the ligament is rotated over the cushion, and the hand is attached to the ankle, and is relaxed, and the hand is not bruised for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And so the patient should be given little food until the limb is comfortable, for it is more pleasant for the healing of the limb.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	When food is eaten in greater quantity or movement is exercised; and thus if it is stopped and not irritated, then the pain has already vanished.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated, whether by moisture that has accumulated in it or for some other cause, then it is necessary to administer cautery three times, as it is said in the chapter on cautery.</end_of_turn>
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all this is done and seven days have passed, the ligament is detached and the joint is not fixed; the swelling and stiffness are reduced over them again, and it is not fixed and does not rise, knowing that the nerves of them, which are at the head of the muscle, are either insensible or extended or softened, and that the joint will never be kept in place forever.</end_of_turn>
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	As for the dislocation of that which is caused by the foot and the knee or the buttocks, reduction is useful with impulse and extension as far as it returns.</end_of_turn
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let the other stiffness be administered, and take care that it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If it happens that the healing is delayed in the limb and the movement is delayed, then the patient must use cold packs until that gravity is relieved and returns to its natural state.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVVII.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the knee.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the knee joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and that which is dislocated in all parts, and more so in the front part than in the back part, and the dislocation of the knee is not hidden from you when it is displaced either from the front or from the back, as it is evident that the knee is concave and cannot bend the knee, or touch with any part of the muscle.</end_of_turn
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And that you must keep the knee bent, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible before the cautery comes, because if you see the cautery come, the reduction will be difficult, and will not be completely healed; and more so if it is in the back part, for it is more painful in all other kinds of dislocation, and there is more swelling in that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the knee, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient is extended with two hands, and the knee is expanded, and the patient's hands are placed over the knee and leave it, and the physician should press the knee with the tips of his fingers or with the heel of his hand until it returns to its place.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in front, the pain returns as soon as you bend the knee, until you pierce the knee with the heel of your hand.</end_of_turn
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, the physician must administer violent extension and force.</end_of_turn
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants extend the arms, and hold that support from the assistants so that it does not slip from the extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And rotate the arms around all parts, because it is enveloped in cartilage bent along the hand, or ligament.</end_of_turn
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the knee with his hand, anoint that with some oil so that these causes which help to lubricate the knee are facilitated; and press the knee with force until it returns.</end_of_turn
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And regarding the reduction, cover that it is paused over that bandage in which there is stiffness and exudate with a piece of cloth of wool, and that it is extended with a stricture descending, and the arm is suspended from the thigh, and is left for a few days.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And so if the knee is formed in its place, then you must detach the ligament from it and leave it like that.</end_of_turn
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if the knee is not strengthened, then you must repeat the packing and the ligament, and leave it for a few days until it is extruded; and then detach that.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if it happens that gravity affects the reduction of the knee, and the situation of the limb is in movement, the physician must administer moisture in water and soft friction, and pressure, until it is relieved; or rest over the knee relieved of that fat; and tie it up, and leave it on the bone for the day and night.</end_of_turn
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And do that until that time, and put that in water; and when it swells, the physician must cool the knee with temperate friction, and repeat that three times, so that it is comfortable in movement, once, twice, and three times.</end_of_turn
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	The corruption has already spread over the teeth within the bath, until it is bound.</end_of_turn>
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, pause over the wet and scaly wound at the border and stretch over that; and make some vinegar, which is wet, and reduce it to its place.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the care of dislocation of the shoulder, which is between the arm and the hand.</end_of_turn>
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder dislocation of the hand is displaced, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, unlike other joints, however it must be done quickly in the moment when it is displaced, otherwise the limb will be permanently damaged or it will happen to it after the displacement that a burn occurs.</end_of_turn
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you pause the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and extend the hand of that, and put your hand or palm on the imminent joint, and hold that until it returns to its place.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered if the palm is already lying against the inside of the hand, when the patient should put two hands over a table during extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, you should put two hands, so that the hand of the doctor rests on that imminent joint.</end_of_turn
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore if it returns completely, that is good; and if not, when you have stretched that as much as possible giving way to the swelling, leave it like that; and do not repeat this until the swelling has gone down.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint remains according to its stiffness; and do not note to the patient any cause, but that the hand is softened and cannot stretch any cause; for it is known that the nerves are torn or crushed, and that it is not due to the injury itself but is stretched by the cautery in the treatment of it and is strengthened as much as the cause confesses.</end_of_turn
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the shoulder is returned, pause over it with the bandage which you have recommended, and leave it and stretch it for five days; and then remove the bandage and leave it and exercise the hand.</end_of_turn
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement is painful and occurs in any degree of gravity, leave that hand immersed in cold water and apply some vinegar, until the pain is relieved.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.</end_of_turn
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the care of dislocation of the fingers.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some of the fingers are dislocated throughout.</end_of_turn
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or at the belly, then hold the finger and drive out the dislocation with the thumb, until it returns.</end_of_turn
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And support the head of the finger, and suspend that beyond the part which is dislocated, and leave it for two days.</end_of_turn
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is equal in that place on the next day.</end_of_turn
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, leave that bound according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it in the day and exercise, and leave it at night; and do this for several days until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with regard to the pain that is at the belly of the hand, and leave that part to that side and do the first operation for the thumb, until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Similarly do the same with regard to the other parts.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.</end_of_turn
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the care of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident occurs to some of the vertebrae of the back or the head dislocation complete, and some vertebrae remain loose from their places, in that case there is no cure, for death covers the patient.</end_of_turn
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of that is that the evacuation of the patient is outside of his will, and he cannot hold it back; and some veins are softened in some parts of his body or two veins of his limbs or two bones of his limb, or one of those; or a vertebra is loosened from its place, for some veins are loosened and some veins are made useless for the evacuation of those to four parts.</end_of_turn
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that which is already loosened at the back is called gelliosis.</end_of_turn
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the care of them be that you consider whether the swelling occurred from puberty, for in that case it is neither a cure nor a healing of everything.</end_of_turn>
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May it be that in that which you see by chance or by percussion or by suspicion as with the ancients, I have already said their methods of treatment are lengthy, of which the most is returned for profit; but I have already abridged that which is little esteemed for its excess, for my intimacy with the thing makes my explanation more comprehensive, to which I have alluded and formed with various instruments which I will show you and explain that one.</end_of_turn>
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in swelling which occurs from the part downwards to the feet, neither is it a cause nor a healing of that; and in the same way as it is caused by two faults.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those there is no cure except that which occurs in the two things themselves as I will recommend.</end_of_turn>
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient's illness be spread over his face over the jawbone towards the ear, and that you extend them so that their legs are not burdened.</end_of_turn
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then put one hand firmly on the thigh and keep it on the ground under the head, and another hand on their feet in the other thigh.</end_of_turn
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister has the hand, and do not hold it in a ditch; and another minister has the other according to that form.</end_of_turn
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then fold over the patient's head and leave their limbs limp; and extend the limb of the limb towards the hand which is on the head of them, and tie that in it; and then strengthen the other limb over the ankles of them towards their buttocks, and tie those in the other hand.</end_of_turn
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the ministers stretch the limb to the part of the hand, and do not leave the two hands and the limbs of their thighs in the places where they are, even though we have said that.</end_of_turn
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until he returns, or that he places them on a table, and that he adjusts over the table the feet of the patient until he returns.</end_of_turn
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if he does not return in this way, take a table whose breadth or length is in the air of three hands, and dig a hole in the wall from which we have said that it is proper for the patient a place where the limb of the table is between.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the palm of the table on the spine, and the doctor places the feet of the patient on the other side, and lift until the spine is contracted and returns to its place.</end_of_turn
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, or turn it around with the hand; and that you stay on the ground that the head of the patient is behind the thigh of two hands, the length of which is one hand, and put the head of it behind the thigh and slightly above two hands; and that the length that is between each hand be a palm, and that is enough in every fist where the turn is made, and that no hand be fixed on the ground so that it is not crushed.</end_of_turn>
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And that there be a round fist in which the turn is made, and that it is turned in the two humors of the two hands.</end_of_turn
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And there is a fold in the limb in which the fist is formed, the length of which is a palm as it is turned; and in the other two fists it is similar to that.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments that you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the fold where the head of them is placed, and the ligaments that you have stretched in the thighs of them in the turn where the feet of them are placed.</end_of_turn
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you must do every turn and keep a minister who will hold the turn with his hand, and the doctor will grasp the spine as we have said.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the way of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the limb is engaged, the hour covers that he pauses with an egg-shaped bandage of alum, and then stops; and then he places over the bandage the edge of the table whose breadth is three fingers or more, and whose length is as much as covers the space of the swelling, and over the part of the spine.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with the ligament which we have said, and use the patient for nourishment until he is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is still any risk of inflammation in the area at the end of the treatment, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe the inflammation over a prolonged period of time, which we have recommended; and this is usually done in the area around the ankle joint.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	There are often accompanying injuries in the area of the heel bones of both feet, which is healed in this way; and that is the bone which has already been mentioned because it is necessary that it should not be injured further by this treatment, which will make you more likely to die.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated ankle
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	It is known that the ankle joint and the ankle muscle joint do not suffer only from dislocation, but also from other affections that affect the other small joints of the foot, causing swelling and concavity
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, that is, towards the front, towards the back, towards the side, or towards the heel
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly it is dislocated towards the front, and little towards the side or towards the heel
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	A sign of the dislocation of the ankle towards the front is that, when you adjust the limb of the patient with the sound limb, the swelling is greater and the area is more prominent than in the sound limb, and the limb cannot bend the toes without causing pain, and this is where the tip of the bone has been fractured.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation towards the side is that the injury is located on the opposite side of this one
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of dislocation towards the heel is that the limb is extended along the limb, but does not bend where it hurts, and if you force it to bend, the urine is retained and the swelling is prolonged, and you must walk on the heel
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of dislocation towards the heel is that the swelling does not expand, nor does the ankle bend where it hurts, and the limb is shorter than the sound limb, and the swelling is softened, and the tip of the bone is fractured at that place
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	In this case, the physician must consider that if the dislocation is old and chronic, it is already outdated, and that you have already administered reduction for it, and remain according to its disposition, because in this case it is not necessary to treat it; and indeed it is not recommended
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	However, in the case of recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocation, you must take care that you reduce the joint and extend it towards the front and towards the back, and also towards the right and left, for the pain will return if you do not do so and will not desist until treated
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if the pain does not disappear in this way, you must prepare to minister strong medicine and extend the limb further, or more tightly, or bind the limb with what is known as a liband; and another minister should stretch out the hand of the person who is being treated so that his toes touch the tips of his fingers; and strengthen the thumb over the area of the wound, and take another minister to hold the limb firmly in place.</start_of_turn>
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension of the limb or of the front part to the ankle bone, or from the back part to the heel bone.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And the extension of all of them until the patient's limb is elevated above the ground and remains hanging down.</start_of_turn>
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This method of extension is common for all four types of dislocation
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	Therefore, if the dislocation disappears as we have said, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for each type of dislocation to administer the appropriate treatment.</start_of_turn>
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocation itself, when it is dislocated, if the dislocation is towards the front, cover that the limb is rested on the outer side of the thigh; and place the liband over the area of the wound from the tip of the bone to the area just below the ankle bone; and stretch the liband from the area of the ankle to the area just above the heel bone.</start_of_turn
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister should firmly support the ankles, and make a tight bandage over the wound of the painful limb and extend it towards the front, so that the pain returns to its original place.</start_of_turn
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This is a lighter treatment for this member than for the others.</start_of_turn
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If he is excused on this account and does not obey the order, then it is necessary that his two feet be firmly bound together with strong thread, curiosity, over both ankles and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each limb be as much as four fingers, and let the affected limb be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the patient be suspended by the hip, and let him be in the middle; and let the length from the earth be as much as two cubits
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a a strong youth that he reduce the cushion, and let another youth be suspended with the patient, and the other youth will reduce the cushion with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction itself, when it is dislocation outwards, cover that the patient grasps his heel as we have recommended in the former instance; and tighten the ligament over the affected limb properly and over the toes.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two thighs are to be placed, one at the foot of the limb, and the other at the head; and two thighs are to be placed adjusted in the middle of the limb that has been placed over which a damp cloth is to be placed, so that the patient is not wet because the thigh is between the patient's thighs, because of this the extension of the limb must not be too violent
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And every minister extends his part, and the doctor with his hand grasps the reduction according to the art
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey respectfully, you will do very well; but if not, stop diligently as we have said in the former instance for that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And cover that the patient grasps his heel as much as possible.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front, cover that the limb is extended with curiosity, as it is said in this medical treatise; and the doctor places his right hand over the affected limb, and with his left hand grasps that which is on the other side, and on that grasp he places that extended to the toes at the level of the ankle.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the back, cover that the patient is not extended to the toes, but is elevated from the earth; having covered that it must be supported firmly, as if the ankle joint were dislocated outwards, as we have said of the support of the limb concerning two cubits; and it is on its face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, without haste.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And cover that a bandage is administered around the area of the joint at which the pain is located.<end_turn>
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore when the reduction is accomplished as we have said — and the sign of the reduction of the limb is not hidden from you, that you extend two limbs of the patient, and when once you have grasped those and the patient stretches his limb slightly and expands that relaxation, you know that the limb is returned as it should be — and then you adjust two cushions and place them under the limb and stretch out the bandage as much as the limb does not suffer from any bruising in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And take out the ligament and the bandage, and compare one limb with the other.<end_turn>
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see that those grasps have been made in vain, you know that the dislocation is already stopped, and then you leave the patient to go about his business.<end_turn>
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of stiffness, you return and plaster that, and stretch that as you first structured it, and leave that for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And take out that one also, and make that one walk slowly for a few days, until he is comforted
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways, that is, it is dislocated outwards, and to the front, and to the back more than to the front; and to the front it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the limb is that the patient commands the patient to place his limb on the cushion; you know that the ankle is dislocated
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient stretch his right foot, even though he has already stretched his limb; adhere the heel of the limb to its face, and place the foot of the limb between the thighs; and another minister extends the foot of the limb until the ankle returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of recovery is that the patient's limb adheres to the cushion that is floating weightlessly.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then place the limb firmly against the cushion and bind it to the cushion with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove the bandage.</end_of_turn>
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not allow the patient to walk for a few days until they are healed and comfortable.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the limb is excused, then administer strong stretching to the ligaments that were previously cared for in the groin.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	(The text continues with additional medical instructions.)</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.</end_of_turn>
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle has some veins that are easily ligated for slight displacement, and some veins are displaced according to custom, and the dislocation is caused either by the tendons or by the bones themselves.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that sometimes the ankle becomes flattened over the part where it is displaced.</end_of_turn
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for displacement is gentle reduction, and it is done with ease by stretching the limb and supporting the limb until it returns to its normal position.</end_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the treatment of dislocation according to custom, command the patient to rest, and have a strong and valiant minister at the back of the two fingers of the limb in the middle of the joint.</end_of_turn
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And place your right hand over the front of the foot and your left hand over the back of the foot in the area of the ankle joint.</end_of_turn
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot towards your right hand, and with your left hand pull it two veins, and then stretch with your left hand; and bind the ankle to the right side of the limb above the bandage.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do two veins as we have counted.</end>
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And bind the foot to the bandage for the third vein, and you are at the ankle joint.</end_of_turn
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one vein or two according to this manner, and if sometimes the foot is equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation until it returns.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden to reduce the limb as we have recommended, then make the patient sit on the bed, and put a pillow on the ground, and place a cushion between the patient's thighs, and you have already supported the limb above the wound to prevent further damage.</end_of_turn
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And have the patient's attendants hold the patient's thighs, and another attendant stretch the foot with their hands or with ligaments that lie on the heel of the foot; and extend whichever minister you like against the extension of the thigh, and the pillow should remain between the patient's thighs to prevent the limb from being pulled towards the lower parts due to its extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the physician should gently reduce the dislocation with the thighs together, and another attendant should hold the healthy ankle towards the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns easily.</end_of_turn
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Therefore, when the dislocation has returned and you have declared that the reduction is complete, then remove the support and gently stretch those ligaments firmly, and bind the foot to the bandage.</end_of_turn
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware or be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligament over that is not torn and that the limb is not stretched too much.</end_of_turn
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And keep the limb still for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, remove it.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.</end_of_turn
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is forced to go through that space, it is not wrong to ensure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive treatment.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If the limb should happen to be fractured later, then cover that you administered in the description of our narrative in another place of care and support, until it is ligated.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiiii.	(The text continues with additional medical instructions.)</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.)</end_of_turn
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	If it is dislocated, it should be equalised with little extension of the limb; and this is not difficult, it is a sign of curiosity.)</end_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is at the ankle bones of both feet, it is necessary to support the patient's foot over the ground or on a table, and to remain in this position as though one were going.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Stay close to the feet, and rest the sole of the foot on what is below the joints, and then cauterize around the area until it returns, and watch that it has become engorged and does not reappear in the area immediately.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And put under the foot a board that covers the whole foot, on which are two cushions, and strengthen that which is stretched downwards and hold it fixed for three days; and then remove that and allow it to walk for several days, until it is healed and the pain is gone
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn>
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the various dislocations that are caused by swelling or fracture or some other lesion.</end_of_turn>
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of these occurs, and you perform care of the wound and restore it, the patient will suffer death if you do not take immediate action.</end_of_turn
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, do not presume that care alone will suffice, but he who is skilled in the art, of long experience, merciful and compassionate, prudent, not proud or presumptuous; and that he should employ in the beginning of medicines that do not cause excessive pain only, and that he should read the patient by the divine judgment, not according to his own judgment, but according to that which hopes for salvation from destruction, both for the alleviation of the disease and for the appearance of any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And do your utmost to reduce it in the beginning of the disease, giving no further pain than is necessary.</end_of_turn
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as it should, then administer the regimen that will cause gradual healing of the wound and that will dry out the swelling.</end_of_turn
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is of the fractured bones separated from each other, then you perforate the ligament between them, and do as is said in the simple diseases of those concerning these places.</end_of_turn
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And be watchful and prudent according to your experience in those things that are said to you by fear, following my prediction; for what is better for you than to have recourse to the Creator? May this be permanent to your glory, and may your salvation be great in the time to come.</end_of_turn>
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the book of Albucasim perfectly blessed by God.</end_of_turn>
Amen.	Amen.</end_of_turn>
