Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Certainly. Here is the translation:
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, children of wisdom, I have come to you to complete this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, because of your faith in me, and for your experiences, and for your declarations, it is clear to me that you must understand this treatise, which is a part of my art, so to speak.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For our region and our time, surgery is a dangerous art, so that the science of it is in great danger; its vision is in its decline; and it does not remain among us except for a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which change the most and bring about those errors and ignorance that arise from the lack of understanding of its principles and the increase of its power and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I believe that I have composed this treatise in such a way as to order the sayings and the declarations and the abbreviations; and that it is for the purpose of adding to the forms of the instruments of cautery and other instruments of the work as well as for the addition of the declaration and the preparation of it, which is necessary
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why one does not find a good surgeon in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that it includes many actors who must exercise their skill in the science of anatomy, which Gualia knows well, since she knows the structure of the limbs and their forms, and their union and separation; and she has knowledge of bones, nerves, and lacerations, and of their number, and of their color; and of the pulsating veins and the quietness of their place.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And thus says Hippocrates that he who has no name is not a man, and in small works and more in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Indeed, as we said at the beginning of this book, he seen many of those who learn anatomy but do not learn it in the way that will save lives; for these are the ones who are formed in this science and depart from it by means of this science and by experiment
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish doctor who, having incised an abscess of the scrotum in the groin of a woman, has incised several arteries of the groin so that a great amount of blood flows out, and the woman died between her legs.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who took a stone from a man who had had it for a long time, and the stone was great, and when he brought it to me, I cut out that stone with a piece of the bladder, and on the third day the man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	I have already told you that in such a case, when the stone is great and the patient’s condition is bad, we must know that he will die
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	I have seen another doctor who was taking care of a duke from our land for surgery, and he caused a black slave who was his servant to break his thigh in the patient’s groin; and in his ignorance the doctor, having fractured the bone, closed the wound with silk and thread of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Then I dismissed them according to their desires, and I bound him, and I left him for five days and commanded that they remove the dressing; and thus the wound festered until the bone was completely exposed and the patient died.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	I went back and found that they had taken off the dressing, and there was peace and the patient was relieved of his pain
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, corruption was already confirmed in the limb, for I could not restrain it, and I did not cease to spread corruption in the limb until the patient was in danger of death.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	I have seen another doctor who performed an operation for cancer of the kidney, and caused ulcers nearby in a few days, so that the malice of the disease grew greater in the master of the house
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that black bile is pure melancholy, which does not suffice to drive out the humour from the whole body, but that it should be applied to the limb which suffers so that the whole body becomes host to the rest
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And thus, children, you must know that the art of surgery must be divided into two divisions: that which is associated with health, and that which is dangerous in the greatest conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	I have already spoken of this in many places in this book where I have discussed the error and fear of surgery; for you must know that it is necessary for you to preserve this and leave that, so that the fools do not find fault with you and you do not suffer for it
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore take the sacred arms in the request and in the protection of God, and the wicked diseases in the facility and in the firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And thus, through the goodness of God, we have reached salvation and a blessed succession, and we have laid low the terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and we have overcome the rest of the weapons of that which you fear, so that you may rejoice in your faith and in your name, for your merit rests with your glory, and more so in heaven and behind the rest of the saints.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Indeed, I have already mentioned several times:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“There is no cure for a bad disease, so that no doctor shall be called by that name”.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already had to deliver this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is arranged of the head inwards of the foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the instruments of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of swelling and perforation, and of blisters, and of wounds, and of the extraction of arrows and similar to these, all capitulated and arranged of the forms of the instruments
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of treatment of twist and similar to these; chapter arranged from the head inwards of the foot, and of the forms of the instruments
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	From cautery with fire and acute medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that one begins the treatise of all the book
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Since I have said what is the quality of the instruments of that cautery and of the documents of them, and in what combination it is prohibited to cauterize
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the word concerning the quality of the instruments of the cautery and of the document is a long and laborious one, and subtle for science, and a secret hidden; and already many savants have spoken of it, and they have disagreed with each other, and I am content with a small part of their sermons, fearing too much extension
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore I say that the cautery conforms to all the universal completion that is in matter or its matter, except for two completions, which are caudal completions of its matter
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the caudal and dry completion I matter disagree; for some say that the cautery is useful for that, and others say that it is harmful for that, because the nature of the fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the disease be both cold and dry with that which is cauterized and dry so that it is healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say that whoever says the opposite, that for the cautery is useful in every cold and dry disease that appears in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man with the humidity of the air with the completion of the fire, you find the body of a man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say concerning this word that I have already experienced it several times in my practice
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	May be, however, I do not say that it should be spoken of that which has already been exposed and exercised in the chapter of the cautery after exercise, and to know the diversity of the humors of men and the situation of diseases in their places, and the causes of these, and the accidents of these, and the space of time of these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	May be in the other completions, it is not about you to fear, and more so in the cold and wet diseases, for already all the doctors have agreed on that, and they do not disagree in the usefulness of the cautery in these
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, children, that the secret of the treatment of the cautery with fire and of the goodness of it, is about the cautery with burning medicine, for the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member to which it is cauterized and does not notice the other member with it adjusted except for a small document
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	For the action of the burning medicine reaches only to that in the member from which it is exhaled, and it makes very strong that the disease in the member is of difficult healing and makes it very strong that it is useful.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	For the fire, for its subtlety and its preciousness, does nothing but flow and we already know by experience and by the length of our service in the art concerning the truth of the causes; and for this reason I am excused for the length of this discourse, for it is not legible to me in this place in this time the secret which is hidden with fire, and the quality of the operation of the fire in the bodies and the expulsion of the disease by it, which is demonstrated in philosophical terms, which would be acute in the following days.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Indeed, children, I have learned that the most opportune time for cautery is when the weather is mildest in the springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for so that it does not suffer from the suddenness of the weather, being immersed in the benefit of that which helps the cautery not to be scorched, especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, which are strong and fiery, which do not suffer from delay so that it is feared that those which come late will bring malice, which is greater than a slight neglect of the time.</end_of_turn>
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	I do not consent in empty words, or, children, those who do not esteem except the vulgar people and fools, doctors, for that disease which is cured by cautery is not ridiculous at all times, and pause that consequence.</end_of_turn>
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not that they say it is because they take care of it with water, for cautery is nothing but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause of these pains.</end_of_turn
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Moreover, however, cautery surpasses medicine by its desire for its value and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of the Lord's gift.</end_of_turn>
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that your disease will return at any time of the day, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, and the virtue of the treatment, and what is prepared in the body of the patient from the accumulation of superfluities in it, and what is obtained by him in the acquisition of food and drink, and from those causes; but the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease of a few superfluities and humors, just as if it were cautery of teeth for pain and as it is in this way that it is possible that in it the said pain will not return, even though it is done in small quantities.</end_of_turn
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And perhaps the vulgar saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and a saying of the learned, not to those who understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that makes use of medicine or of any other cause except cautery.</end_of_turn
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is the opposite of that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is true only when they administer the methods of treatment in certain diseases, and those medicines do not benefit, and in the end of the cause they administer manes cautery, and make use of that.</end_of_turn
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And so it is that from here it can be understood that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the vulgar people and fools of the doctors have of it.</end_of_turn
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and I do not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.</end_of_turn
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And I say that the place of cautery does not make it fierce, as it is not absolutely true, for I myself have seen that it does no harm in any other parts, and that cautery with that is good and better than with iron, even though they say so; however, when you do cautery with fire from gold, it is not for you to declare, for it is ignited according to the quantity you wish for the roughness of the gold, and prepare to receive cold; and if you add too much fire to it the gold will melt for the fire, and if you are unlucky in the fire some plates will be broken because the artificer will take hold of it for the work.</end_of_turn
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason it is useful to do cautery with iron, you must put it lightly and more cautiously to the right of the operation.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those that are among the feet to be omitted, so that I can relieve the seeker of what he demands of me.</end_of_turn
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for head pain from cold and humidity.</end_of_turn
Le capitol primier.	Chapter one.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers upon cold and humid air the accidental cause of which it is a cause of soda and multiple flows of humors rheumatic, applied to the head and the flanks of the humors and the surrounding areas fluent, and multiple sleep, and toothache and headache, and universally of every disease that comes from cold, even as paralysis, tetanus and apoplexy, and is similar in those diseases.</end_of_turn
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, that first of all it commands the patient to be evacuated with medical laxatives, the head being moistened with medicine for three or four nights, according to the excess of the virtue of the disease and the age of the patient and his custom.</end_of_turn
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And I command him to shave the head of the patient, and that he make this pass between his legs over a fallen bench and that he place his hand on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And keep your thumb close to the base of your nose between your eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Moreover, since the physician has already said of the location of the affected area, sign that place with your finger, and then cauterize with an olive-shaped instrument of this kind:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And keep your hand still over the area to be treated, in such a way that your thumb will gradually descend, to which your hand should be clasped tightly, and you should rotate it
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then gently lift your hand and support the area, and if you see any part of the bone already uncovered, as much as a grain of wheat, then elevate your hand again, and if you do not turn your hand away from the instrument, do so from the other side, until the bone is visible as much as I have said
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a little salt and dissolve it on the area and leave it on for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And keep your knee bandaged on the border and leave it on until the burn mark of the fire is gone
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area with tetracycline until it is healed
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And indeed when the wound remains open, it is better to take off the bandage, because it is better and more healing
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	I say to you all that the bone must be cauterized until the bone itself, and that you must hold the cautery until all the parts of the bone are healed.</start_of_turn>
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And keep the wound clean of the bone, and finally cure it.</start_of_turn>
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And I say that the cautery must be applied towards the heel, until the bone feels strong pain in the bone itself, which is the way to make a small incision:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that from that area vapor rises from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And keep the wound open for a long time, and finally cure it when it is consolidated.</start_of_turn>
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two kinds of cautery among men of learning, except in madmen; and leave that to them, for I believe that it is better for your health, when it is; because the head of the disease is of a cold nature. As we have testified in other limbs, and even more so when the head of the disease is of a fiery nature.</start_of_turn
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first kind of cautery is better and more beneficial for you; and from that one here and from that work I have seen health.</start_of_turn
Capitol segon.	End of text.
Del cauteri del cap.	From the head burn.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the head there is chronic pain that lasts a long time and when the disease lasts for a long time, and you use sponges, bowls, caps, plasters, mustard, vinegar, garlic, barley, and alum, and especially if it has already been cauterized with an instrument that they praise and which does not help it in any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the disease is of great heat in its nature; and it is not cold or otherwise finds little heat, then that cauterizes with another burn leaves some space.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And cauterize that over the nail of the thumb up to the bone is separated.</start_of_turn>
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the bone and uncover from the bone the quantity that we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery on the outer part of the head in the area which is called varicose — and that is the area where the wind is stopped.</start_of_turn
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And rest your hand in this way, and do not uncover the bone, because the disease finds great pain in all other burns of the head.</start_of_turn
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I say this burn in this place, because it covers the burn that is made with the instrument with which the nails and the occiput are cauterized is more subtle than that which is made in the middle of the head; and this is the way to do it.</start_of_turn
Capitol ters.	End of text.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the antiquity of the cautery of foreign origin.</start_of_turn>
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the part of the head there is persistent pain, or widespread pain throughout the head, evacuate immediately with medicines that soothe the head, and administer the other treatment which I have mentioned in the preceding chapters; and all this without any benefit, for the cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either with acute medicinal combustion or with an instrument.</start_of_turn
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Better is the cautery with medicinal combustion than that with an instrument, for you take a little alum, pour it out, and cover your head with both hands.</start_of_turn
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And now prick the area of pain in the temple with a lancet as far as it is feasible without leaving the wound open, since it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And now keep pressure on it for a while to prevent excessive constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the ligature and pull the flesh away, and leave the wound covered for two or three days, and place your hand over it until the area heals
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, know that there are many medicines that can combat these, which I have written about in the preceding treatise on medicinal treatments.</start_of_turn>
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be performed according to this method: use fire for the cautery of which this is the form:</start_of_turn>
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called closed clamps, in which the head is like a nail in which there is a small curvature in the middle of the area.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And place your hand over the area of pain, and hold your hand — so that the wound is not torn from the cautery which is left — and withdraw the fire little by little at a speed.</start_of_turn
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of tissue that is torn by the specularity of the wound is as great as the majority, elevate your hand so that the artery is not torn, which is left, so that there is no flow of blood.</start_of_turn
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And immerse the area in salt water and place it over the area, and leave it for three days; then remove the dressing and cover the area with a bandage, and take care of it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the extremity of the cuticle according to the incision, and keep the area from excessive bleeding in this particular emigration that is not ancient.</start_of_turn
Capitol quart.	End of document.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	About the cautery of ancient emigration.</start_of_turn
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you have cured the emigration according to what has been said of the previous treatment and what has been said in the divisions of diseases, and do not take advantage of the treatment, and sometimes for the disease that does not cover it adequately compared to the first cautery of medicine or the cautery of fire, know that you should ignite the cautery of the cuticle until it is bleached, because it signifies over the area of pain along the line of length of which is the majority of the digit, or whatever; and remove your hand for a while and hold that position until you have incised the artery and reached the bone.</start_of_turn
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must take care that the mandible is not continued, which is praised for chewing, and that the wound is not torn and that the nerves that are bad for that are not damaged, and that there is no spasm.</start_of_turn
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood of the artery that is incised, which is feared, and more so for that which ignores what it does and is reckless; leave the operation to the beginning.</start_of_turn
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come to remind you of the regimen of the flow of blood according to the custom of this land, in this place of this book.</start_of_turn
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not benefit from this cautery and you see that the patient can tolerate the disease, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and care for the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with two clamps, and this is better cautery and more reliable.</start_of_turn
Capitol .v.	End of Document.</start_of_turn>
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	About the cautery of the pains of the heel.</start_of_turn
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the heel there is pain from cold and is cured by means of lakes and other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has no name, of which this is the form:</start_of_turn
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And prick near the ignition, and be careful around the entire heel as if it were rotated, or in the course of any wrinkle if the pain is in any place.</start_of_turn
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with that, take hold of the root of the heel a little more slowly than that because you have to mark the area with your finger.</start_of_turn
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you have cauterized ten times in the entire heel, and what is that, and take care of the wounds until they are healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Capital six.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The sixth degree of cautery.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the species that must remain dry or for spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you have cured that kind of turtura with herbs and capitula and unguarias, and you do not want to burn the patient, then cover the painful area with three cauteries: one at the root of the nail, the second a little beyond the middle, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And keep the cautery away from the contrary side of the painful area, because mollification does not take effect except in the part that appears to be well.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the way of cautery is that you cauterize that which is above the nail at the root of the toe somewhat more than over the head of the nail, and in the middle another, the length of which is according to the length of the finger without going beyond that. Stop your hand with the cautery when the quantity of the matter of the species of the code has been consumed
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of cautery, and it is the species of the surgeon, the form of which is like a table
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	More gently indeed is that which one sees here in these verses; and cover with little superfluous thickness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with the area around the area that is being cauterized until it is well.
Capitol .vii.	Capital seven.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cautery of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When the apoplexy is ancient and you have cured that which we have said, and you do not fear your medicine, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the nails of the foot; above the nail and below the head of the nail as we have said; and on the gum
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of cautery is sufficient as has been said
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is sufficient to cauterize on the mouth of the stomach; more so behind; and like this it is cured with what proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Capital eight
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cautery for painless inflammation
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover that the patient should not feel pain at the beginning with large doses of wine and serve him medicine that softens.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then wipe the whole head of the patient and place his gums in the places described in the treatise of plasters
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And stop any herbs, for that is the way of cautery
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do as that which has already been said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if for these good ones; and if not, then do three cauteries at the back of the foot, which are dependent on the more dominant part of the head towards the more distant part of the cheek.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And stop between each cautery the breadth of a finger, and like this cure the cautery with what proceeds
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	More if you are addicted and the patient is able, then do the cautery in the middle of the head; and if you wish to be more addicted, then cauterize that over the two nails
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Like this cure that which is when it is well; and let the cautery be olive oil as has been said before
Capitol .ix.	Capital nine
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cautery of carbuncles and of the softening of all the body
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in the softening of the head with wine and as we have said; and like this wipe the head of the patient, and like this cauterize that which is cauterized in the middle of the head, and over all the nails of the head, and over the back of the head, and three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of the softening of the body of the limbs that the patient is tolerant and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the thorax, and then cauterize until it is consumed by the code without leaving any mark, and remove the hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Like this cure when it is well, and this is olive oil
Capitol .x.	Capitol.x.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Capital.x.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No is cauterized the epileptic but that epilepsy is for flexibility.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore modify the head of the patient at the beginning and at the end of treatment and another cure that we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not suffer from medicines, then give safeguards and bitter substances that serve to modify, giving them for a few days, for the benefit of foods
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then return the head of the patient, and then cauterize that which is like a cautery in the middle of the head according to the manner mentioned above, and at another cautery in the nape of the neck, and over every corner of the head wherever you wish to cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that which we have said, having paralyzed and mollifying the body over the vertebrae of the hip and the vertebrae of the loin
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And olive oil be cauterized as it is preceded.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	Maybe if the patient is a child, then pause the cautery subtly according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Capital.xi
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	From cautery of melancholy
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and great flexibility, then cauterize that which we have said in the having paralyzed
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which modifies the head of the patient as it has been mentioned in the division
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then return the head of the patient, and then make a gentle twist downwards from the outside inwards, and then stop that in the middle of the head
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient is senseless and falls asleep, and is kept away from all parts
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then pause liniment; and it is more worthy to border against a sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And burn that over the fire for temperate heat for measure, which tells that it suffers when it is in it for a month.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in the middle of the head of the patient in the circle, and take it away when it is inflamed
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And give the patient water throughout the week a little at a time, along with another regimen of the good things that are not to be taken away until he is well; or if you wish, cauterize that which makes little holes according to the greatest of them, but keep your hand over the area with a cautery in order to order: this is a special cautery that hums the head equally
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then stop that which is hanging in border or in gray of grease.
Capitol .xii.	Capital.xii
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	From cautery of water descending in the sweat
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is announced to you at the beginning of the sweating for the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink water that which modifies the head of the patient, and keep that away from all humidity
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him sweat in bath for a few days
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command him to shave his head, and cauterize that which is like a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize that which is like two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of sweating of water in two sweats, or one drop if it is the beginning of sweating of water in one sweat
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Include all veins and arteries which are left of the coccyx; and make the cauteries in that length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep away from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see blood fluxes, stop any medicine that is to you possible
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I know of wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those and care for blood fluxes.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And many veins are cauterized at the neck leaving two bones with two cauteries arranged one after the other.
Capitol .xiii.	Capital.xiii
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	From cautery of ancient tears
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the humors are old and settle upon the veins and arteries that are in the head, it is confirmed that these are superfluous free fatty humors. Therefore, cauterize the point which we mentioned at the beginning of this discourse concerning the cold humors which cause thirst, and the point in the middle of the head, and two cauteries in the armpits, two on the temples, and two on the armpits of two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is indigestion from excess, then cauterize that point throughout the waist of the belly above the little toe with a small cautery.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cautery for the pain of the nose.</end_of_turn>
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your physician has said enough and has not benefited from his medication, then you shall appear and give the patient wine to drink for three nights; and at the same time take his head in your hand and cauterize the point between the eyebrows and the olive.</end_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And also cauterize the point between the eyebrows with two cauteries above the two nostrils so that the hair is cut off a little.</end_of_turn
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And take care that you do not burn the skin.</end_of_turn
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the manner of the cautery between the eyebrows.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.</end_of_turn
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cautery for the swelling of the eyelids of the humors.</end_of_turn
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the humor is swollen due to disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery; this is how to do it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries throughout, and let them be longer than the temples.</end_of_turn
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the eyebrow.</end_of_turn
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not burn your hand too much with the cautery, but as much as the third part of the eyelid is adhered.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.</end_of_turn
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cautery of the eyelid of the humor when its tears have become converted to drops and put its hand on the humor.</end>
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the tears of the humor have become converted to drops and put its hand on the humor, cauterize in those two ways, either by burning or by medicinal powder.</end_of_turn
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you burn with the cautery, order the patient to drink until the tears flow freely again as before; and if you put on the cautery, strengthen the humors of the patient with a bandage so that they do not suffer until the tears are reborn.</end_of_turn
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are reborn and equal, then take the patient's head in your hand and place your hand over the eyelids of the patient with your finger, as with the figure of a laurel leaf, and let the signal begin from the tears.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And also stop the bleeding with albumin of blood or in egg white over the humor.</end_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And do this with the cautery that we have mentioned.</end_of_turn
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize over the sign that you have made, little by little, in moist tears, until the surface of the wound is like a laurel leaf, completely apparent in the same way.</end_of_turn
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the completion of your work is that you see the eyelid of the humor already contracting and the tears of the humor already raised above the puncture of the humor.</end_of_turn
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so lift your hand and keep it there for three days, and stop the bleeding over it with a border until the wound is healed.</end_of_turn>
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	However, if it returns for any reason, order them to drink again and the eyelid is swollen, then do the cautery once more over the whole thing as you did at first.</end_of_turn
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	However, if the tears are on the eyelid, then cauterize only when it is raised to its natural place and is equal, and that the tears do not touch the humor.</end_of_turn
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	The patient should be commanded to rest in bed until the pain has subsided and equilibrium is restored. And let a paste of slippery paper be applied in the form of a leaf of mirtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And let him take nourishment of broth and live on broth alone for now.</end_of_turn> namely.</end_of_turn> Or what you will, mix these things together and make a fasting for him so that he is not chilled; and spread a little of that over the paper which is applied thus like a leaf of mirtle, and rest your hand over the heel or both; and let the patient's head rest in the armpit of the album of the hand, and keep his chest still.</end_of_turn>
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And let me tell you about the medicine and give him a little, but do not delay until he has felt the benefit of the medicine, because the benefit is in him just like fire.</end_of_turn
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore when you perceive that the other pain has ceased, then read the medicine and do not touch him until he has told you that; when the pain has ceased, then remain with the medicine and wash his hand with water; and when you have finished, consider whether the eye has already recovered just as if it had been washed away by the constriction of fire or incision, for the hour is like that; and if it does not return concerning the medicine on that part where you did not impress the medicine and did not denigrate it until the operation is completed and the hand is restored.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And let rest over his heel near the border until the spur of the wound has disappeared, and take care of him until he is deafened or until he is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary that you, after your operation, diligently guard the hand so that the medicine does not fall from it, and if the eye has become softened for a few days due to the pricking of the needles in the hand, then repeat your medicine on that part where the eye is softened, just as you did at the beginning, and keep it there until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of the mirtle leaf.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Note that the humors of men are diverse according to their magnitude and quantity, and therefore according to what is useful for you.</end_of_turn
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not be ignorant of the right way to treat this.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cautery of fistula in the tear duct of the hand.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat the fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and you do not fear the consequence of your treatment, then order the patient to rest his head on his chest, and keep his head in the hands of any minister between the thighs in such a way that it is not maimed or agitated on the head of the patient.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And let rest the heel immersed in the water of the album or in mucus of peas on the hand of him.</end_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And let him cauterize with the instrument whose form is this:</start>
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is concave, like a tube or a wheel of fire, from one extremity to the other where the cautery is to be made.</start
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, penetrate through to the other extremity.</start
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, go out like this as well.</start
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Better is the one that is concave to the chest.</start
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if the fistula is open, grasp it and bring it to health and dry it off.</start
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.</start
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And let rest over the heel let the cautery be well ignited, and take care that your hand does not move or that the patient becomes restless, and let rest the cautery on the gray matter of the hand and break that.</start
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	Therefore if at the beginning of the cautery it enters the bone, do not do it; but if it does enter, repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then rest over that heel near the border and send it away with great exsiccation until it is healed.</start
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing twenty days it is not healed, then rest over the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and is scraped as it is fitting in the aforementioned chapter.</start
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And thus is another method of cautery, which the first physicians said: enter the site of the fistula and when you have done so, pause for a moment in that cavity where the shape of it is like a bed of nails; and there let the quantity of blood which has fled be; and keep your hand pressed against the wound with good retention, and do not be afraid of the patient because the blood will not reach the head of the wound; and cover that head of the wound with alum of lead or in water, so that the blood adheres to the site of the fistula and heals that for a miraculous cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by the blood which we have said of the cautery and the cure, that is well; but if not, it is necessary to administer a purgative from the nose and reduce the fistula to the head of the nose as it will be in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the cautery of the wound.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	The veins become swollen and inflamed in the lips, and more especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore when you cure those wounds by the water which we have said in the divisions and do not avail yourself of your cure, then indeed you must make a small burn according to this fashion:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the curvature of it according to the form of a box.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And pause for a moment that quantity of liquid which has escaped within those wounds until the burn reaches the head of the wounds.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And thus care for that until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When on the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth there is swelling and the lip becomes broken, and is softened, and the vein bursts, and a fistula is made, and when you do not avail yourself of the cure, then indeed you must burn according to the quantity which is received in the fistula, and put that flame in the rectum of the fistula, and keep your hand over that until the flame reaches the head of it, and after that make some bleeding or two; and then care for that until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus if the swelling is abscessed and is healed, that is well; but if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and support the decaying bone according to what will be said in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery of the teeth and the softening of the veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are stained, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide in them, then indeed you must place the head of the patient in the belly and burn the form of which will come to pass in this way, that you must pause the quantity which is over the tooth until the burn has reached the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And thus take your hand away, and burn several times according to your wish
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And thus moisten the patient’s mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then remove it, for the stained tooth is stopped and the softened gum is strengthened and the moisture which was corrupted is dried up
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the treatment of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is from cold, or it is hot or does not avail itself of the cure with medicine, then indeed you must burn in two ways: either with a burn from the cows or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The burn from the cows is that you take the border of cows and burn it in a crucible of iron, and you take some butter and cover it over the extremity of the limb, and you put that which is buttered over the painful tooth until it is inflamed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And thus burn several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	Or if you wish, immerse wool or butter in the border mentioned above, and place that on the painful tooth, and place over that the burning iron until the iron reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	More importantly, when you burn with fire you must attend to the quantity of charcoal or iron, and be in the center of the cavity of the tooth so that the acute heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And thus draw the cautery in the shape it will come, and keep it above the nail and put your hand over it until it is inflamed; and do whatever you can to make the pain subside, whether today or tomorrow or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And so, for the purpose of this cautery, that the patient should fill their mouth with good broth for an hour, and then wipe it away; this is the shape of the cautery.</end_of_turn>
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And burn as much as you can of the extremities according to your ability.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the shape of the cannula:</end_turn
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.</end_turn>
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cautery of external swellings.</end_turn
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external swellings are due to cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, then you must ignite the cautery to its shape as described below, having two extremities covered so as to escape the smoke of the cautery from the other, and keep the flame above the swelling for a while, and do the same again if necessary, until the swelling has disappeared.</end_turn
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is slight, then keep the cautery away from the quantity of the swelling, and let it rest for three days, and place it over the edge of the swelling until the fire that has consumed it has gone out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care that the patient does not suffer from pain, and try and wrap and cover with cloths until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or the cautery should be such as to convert.</end_turn
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.</end_turn
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery of the throat and constriction of the belly.</end_turn
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity is over the root of the lung, and especially when it is the cold of complexion, then you must make the patient evacuate at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the area where the tonsils are rooted in the indented place.</end_turn
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Beware that you do not reach the tonsils or burn the edge of the tongue, but only a little.</end_turn
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize the other side of the cautery must be at the joint of the colon in the back of the vertebra of the belly.</end_turn
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of the belly should be similar to the previous one.</end_turn
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care that what precedes is finished before it is healed.</end_turn
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery of the lung disease and cough.</end>
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity and the patient has neither fever nor chills and is an old disease, then you must make two cauteries on the furcula in the indented places on the front and back; and another cautery in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and the cautery should be similar to the previous one.</end_turn
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	Or if you wish, make the puncture with the cautery that is called puncture, whose shape you will find in the puncture of heel pain.</end_turn
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And so do the punctures as desired; and take care that what precedes is finished before it is healed.</end_turn
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And so the cautery has had three ramps that the cautery is in this: one can make three cauteries in this way.</end_turn
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery of the titillum which is the head of the helper.</end_turn
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is displaced due to oily humidity and does not stop in the hour of the seed return, you must displace it until it is at rest as it usually does; and by a slight movement it is displaced again as we have testified, so that you must first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient must be reversed over the seed two or three times; and then lift the chin which is at the root of the titillum towards the parts below as far as your left hand, if the joint is displaced towards the root.</end_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so draw the cautery twice; and this is the shape of it:</end_turn
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And so cauterize the chin until it pierces through to the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come when there are four cauteries.</end_turn
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so that subtle thing is according to the quantity of tentacles; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Each burn is adjusted according to this count and because they are cauteries of eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And so you pause over the burn with salt, and then adhere the patient to tranquility, and do not move the limb for any time until it is comforted
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the base of the heel and it is necessary, then cauterize over the Achilles muscle or over the tip of the cautery, so that the joint is confirmed and the moisture is expelled and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cautery of the stomach
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and moist humors in the stomach that come out of its composition and multiply in it, and if you continue the treatments and do not confirm them, then know that the patient must be placed on their side, extend their hands and feet, and then cauterize three times: on one cautery leave the toes for the quantity of one finger at the level of the Achilles, and on two cauteries leave the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular shape of the cautery appears; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted that will make the burn less painful.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the burn is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the codena bone
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the burn should be like this, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a burn in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize the stomach point by point until the burn is satisfied: and know that you must sign over the stomach point according to the quantity you wish on the tentacles, and then cauterize again at those points; and then care for that with the care that precedes until it is healed
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cautery of the painful heel.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the heel due to cold, moisture, or excessive wind that comes out of normal composition due to excessive discharge, and it is cured by what we have said and not confirmed, then know that the patient must be placed on their chest, and sign with three cauteries according to this form and this quantity on the heel beyond the hip bones, the heel bone must be firm to the sitting position of the man
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each burn is according to the thickness of the finger, and the burn is according to the length of the limb stretched out
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not tighten over the burns more
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of liquid that is applied is equal to the amount of the major part of the thickness of the codena bone, and it is not more adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then know that they have already extended their thighs, and elevate the calves.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the burn:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you are able to cauterize these burns with a pointed cautery, when it is at your prudence and skill in the art
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And take care that you do not proceed too much in the cautery, and that the thickness of the whole heel is cauterized so that the whole limb is cauterized and reaches the intestines, because the heel is subtle here; and know when to stop
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the perforation of the heel abscess with a cautery
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an extrusion or abscess in the heel and you want to know if that abscess is in the heel bone or in the membrane of the limb, then if it is in the heel bone, the pain becomes heavy and the pain is acute
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the heel, with great pain that often tires out the doctors from caring for it
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore know that the patient must be placed on their chest; and then sign the abscess with the tentacles; and then burn the cautery that is made like a rag, as the shape is described in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize until the whole heel is covered, until it reaches the periosteum, until it is scabbed over and healed
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the aftercare of the other abscesses until they are healed
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it should not be used in this way of cautery except for that which one has studied in the art of medicine and in most of which sicknesses are known; indeed, with this one one must experiment somewhat on this operation, but nevertheless read that which must be observed.
Capitol .xxix.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	From the cautery of the soles of the feet.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Say that the ancient cautery of the roots of artology towards frega follows this manner; and that you take from the roots of artology long and dry a needle whose size is that of a thumb
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And immerse that in oil and burn that at the fire, and cauterize with a needle in that place where it is between the continuation of the collarbone and the ribs; and with two small cautery needles you guide, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and two cautery needles in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the twelfth, declining slightly towards the back; and another cautery needle in the middle of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cautery needles from the back; and one cautery needle in that place which is between the two buttocks, and two cautery needles from the two sides of the foot, leaving the cautery needle which is between two buttocks.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but rather in the sign of the code in work
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And indeed I say that the ancient ones say that these are the men who use cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite that, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until we have come to that apostema and it is healed soundly, as we have said in the apostema of the foot
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Indeed, in this perforation there is no fear of cautery, for so many have already happened in the fistulous place where it does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.</start_of_turn>
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the heel
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the heel according to what we have said in the division and do not confer the care, then the cautery in it is done in three ways, which are all safe, of which one is that you make three or four incisions according to the length of the heel according to the figure of the cautery needles of the foot, the figure of which has preceded
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery there should be the size of a thumb or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have said in the cautery of the foot equally
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be even more on the side of the two thighs
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterizing, which is that you ignite the cautery having two assistants, which cause we have mentioned in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the limb which is in the end of the heel towards the heel of the patient without causing the patient to suffer the left side of the illness.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such as to elevate the limb according to the length of the limb, so that the cautery is made according to the breadth of the body
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And immediately bring together the two assistants, ignite them not, in that place where the other penetrates the limb of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And immediately withdraw the cautery; and thus there are four cautery needles in total
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	Or if you wish, cauterize with three assistants.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And keep your care after the cautery longer than it has lain with the laying of the bandage for several days, because it is different from the other preceding causes in the care of the wound
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxxi.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery of the heel
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The cautery should not be made in ydropici but in alcinte properly
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the ydropic according to the methods of care which we have said in the division and do not confer the care, then cover that he makes four cautery needles in the circumference of the embolism and one cautery needle over the stomach, and another cautery needle over the foot, and another cautery needle over the heel, and two cautery needles between the vertebrae of the two, and one cautery needle in the groin, and another cautery needle over the stomach
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of depth of the cautery should be appropriate for the spiciness of the bone.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And so make the cautery incision wide enough so that it will not hurt for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Do not evacuate the patient from the incision until the cautery has healed over and covered with two layers of flesh, and do not do so too quickly but rather slowly with the help of healing.</start_of_turn>
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery at which it is cauterized is like a clove, as is its natural shape, and that at which it is cauterized like two olives following its natural shape.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .xxxii.	(The text continues with further medical instructions.)</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery of the feet and the groin.</start_of_turn
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with hydrosis and filled with sour urine, cover that you cauterize the foot on the two toes that are not painful in the area between the heel and the ankle; and hold your hand over the cautery and do not move away from it; and raise your hand further up, and do not return it until the sour urine has subsided.</start_of_turn
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the cautery in this way: Make two incisions on the two sides of the heel, and in any other place where it is necessary to make a cautery incision at the end of the cautery needle.</start_of_turn
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the depth of the cautery should be equal to the length of the incision: leave the nail of the nail of the nail and the other under the middle of the incision; and over each incision make two cautery incisions.</start_of_turn
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for healing for a long time so that no urine remains from it.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And so treat the causes which we have mentioned.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	(The text continues with further medical instructions.)</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdomen.</start_of_turn
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is too cold and humid so that the intestines must be protected, it is the digestive and retaining virtue, which are in the stomach and the intestines, and it is cured by the methods of treatment and does not confer pain; sometimes the patient suffers a cautery of the virtue manifesting, when it is necessary to make a large incision over the great stomach as is done in the cautery of the stomach, at the circle and at four cauteries in the circumference of the subileal loop, at the clove-shaped cautery; and over the omentum over fat or two cauteries.</start_of_turn
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the external humors and the patient tolerate it, then cauterize over the appendix and over the intestines, strengthening two cauteries over the stomach and under the flanks, which is perfect treatment for the relief of which there is no error.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiv.	(The text continues with further medical instructions.)</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.</start_of_turn
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of the rectum, old hemorrhoids or those of cold humors or corrupted humidity, and are cured by what has been said in the division and do not cause pain, then cauterize with three cauteries over the base of the two little toes and the little triangular one, and remove the navel cord with two fingers.</start_of_turn
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the stomach is affected and the food is not digested, and that the face is sometimes pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large incision as has been said; and one incision over the flank and another incision over the bellybutton at the clove-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxv.	(The text continues with further medical instructions.)</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cautery of the heel close to the abscess of the leg.</start_of_turn
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When the abscess of the heel is formed, then you burn the area that is like a ray.</start_of_turn
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And between put that fire in that heel abscess, and finish with your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the healing comes.</start_of_turn
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do that with two incisions or more, because if you do not achieve them, then cauterize each one of them as we have recounted, and treat those which cause pain until they are healed.</start_of_turn
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is more dangerous in judgment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	If you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is more dangerous in judgment.</start_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	If you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is more dangerous in judgment.</start_of_turn
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, whether he is healthy or sick.</start_of_turn
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees fistula in the nature that is old, corrupted by blood and humidity, and it is therefore more deserving that one should attempt to remove it secretly, and to limit the quantity of its depth to what is in front of the attempt.</start_of_turn
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Therefore, use the cautery that resembles a ray.</start_of_turn
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And therefore put that cautery on that fistula and according to the quantity with which you are attempting to remove it.</start_of_turn
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat that until you have burned those corrupt parts until a streak or two or three have been consumed, according to the quantity of your need.</start_of_turn
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And take care of the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula is on the bladder or the abdomen, then take care of all those parts; and do not do anything until the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the place until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and so the matter is detached from it, and remains like this for a long time, then know that it is already completely healed.</start_of_turn
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not held in it, then know that it is penetrating or in the preparation of corruption, or falls from those causes of which remembrance will come to mind in that place.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxvii.	The end of the text is not included in the provided context, so I cannot provide a translation for it.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cautery of the humors.</start_of_turn
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the humors there is pain due to cold or for excessive wind, and to help the patient overcome the illness, it is customary to cauterize that which is above the humors with a pointed cautery on every humor with a keyhole from which the memory comes.</start_of_turn
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And do the same with three small incisions, so that there will be three cauteries lined up, and therefore they will be more effective in judgment.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxviii.	The end of the text is not included in the provided context, so I cannot provide a translation for it
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cautery of the bladder.</start_of_turn
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is an accident in the bladder due to swelling and relaxation by cold and humidity, and the urine does not retain well, then cauterize that which is further below on the bladder, as far as the edge of the pubic bone, and cauterize with a cautery at the three o'clock position and at the nine o'clock position.</start_of_turn
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery is according to the quantity of the patient's need; and cauterize that which is further down on the leg, or two cauteries if necessary.</start_of_turn
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And be the cautery keyhole as it is processed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxxix.	The end of the text is not included in the provided context, so I cannot provide a translation for it.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cautery of the uterus.</start_of_turn
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is in the uterus cold and humidity, and to help prevent inflammation, and the monthly blood is corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and there is pain due to the lack of them, then it is necessary that the location should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower part of the leg, or with two cauteries, and that the cautery be keyhole.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xl.	The end of the text is not included in the provided context, so I cannot provide a translation for it.</start_of_turn
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cautery of dislocation of the ankle.</start_of_turn
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucus humors are poured out in the ankle area, and there are causes of excessive bending of the limb, and a sign of it is that the limb is prolonged over the other when compared to each other.</start_of_turn
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is found in the area where the boy lies.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	When you cauterize the ailment on the ankle area towards the heel, do so in a circular fashion around the circumference of the part, as if making a ring, so that the part falls into the middle of the circle.</end_of_turn>
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the shape of the cautery used for this procedure is like that of the cautery used for the stomach.</end_of_turn>
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cautery is not available, then do three cauteries with an olive oil cautery.</end_of_turn
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And do the cautery according to the amount of spiciness of the entire area; and take care that it is done properly.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xli.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Concerning the cautery of the sciatic vein.</end_of_turn>
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When there is pain in the ankle area, due to cold and moisture, the ailment is cured with the things that we have already mentioned and not otherwise; and when it has been treated, when you have left the cold and moisture of the humors, then you can cauterize the area with strong pills or artificial or similar pills; and do the cautery.</end_of_turn
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	There are two methods for doing the cautery: with medicinal powders that burn, or with fire.</end_of_turn
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize the area around the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and do it to a good depth.</end_of_turn
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is equal to the thickness of the finger, and if it is an olive or large cautery.</end_of_turn
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some people say that the cautery should be done on the middle of the ankle for it is four cauteries.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, do the cautery in the circle surrounding the ankle dislocation, which should be a continuous circle and burn the spiciness of the entire area.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cautery for the sciatica when the pain is limited to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.</end_of_turn
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it extends into the thigh, then do two cauteries on the thigh over the area where you feel the pain; and one cautery on the heel for four fingers just below the hip bone.</end_of_turn
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the cautery is blistering, and the depth of the cautery is according to the amount of spiciness of the area.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the pain extends to the feet, then do the cautery here where you feel the pain with three points or four or more if you deem it necessary.</end_of_turn
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the pain is left after the swelling has gone down, then do the cautery here with a blistering cautery.</end_of_turn
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Beware in all cauteries that you do not burn nerves or large arteries, and that for this reason you must be careful not to cause damage to the pain or contraction.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	I have already seen two cases where someone has cauterized the heel and finished the cautery, and the limb became inflamed until the tumor disappeared, and the limb was perforated and corrupted throughout.</end_of_turn
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And mix a strong solution of vinegar and water, and do the same with the death of the patient.</end_of_turn
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two places do each one according to this method.</end_of_turn
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The learned men say concerning the cautery of the ankle that the circle should be like a circle of iron whose circumference is equal to the width of a palm; and that the distance between the incisions should be like the thickness of a date seed or less.</end_of_turn
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And draw a third circle; and the distance between them should be equal to the length of a nail; and these circles should be closed with iron wire properly placed in the circles. This is the shape of them.</end_of_turn
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Do the cautery over the fire so that it smokes and gives sparks, and keep it covered over the ankle area, with the pain resting on the outside of the limb.</end_of_turn
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Therefore cauterize with three cautery instruments around the joint at one time.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Therefore leave it for three days; then apply a plaster around the limb and leave the wound open for several days; and finally care for the area until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Say Albucasis: or, friends, for this kind of cautery we have rarely used for the terror of the patient, and for what few have found that which please them concerning him.</end_of_turn>
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May these three cautery instruments be for him who suffers from them, and find in that place for them.</end_of_turn>
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May these cautery instruments be more lasting than medicines, for you must make two circles having the navel pierced in the middle, through which the guts of the door of the belly should pass; the length of the incision from the navel to the waist should be two walnuts or so.</end_of_turn
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between some part of the quantity of the thickness of the toe; and if they are opened and loosened, and if they contain each other according to this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the ankle, and keep the patient’s hand still on the ankle; and take cold water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be like that of small fire, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the pain of the patient the bite and the pressure of the limb — for that other bite is like fire — until the bite stops.</end_of_turn
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand towards the instrument and wash the cold water from the ankle with warm water.</end_of_turn
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and keep your hand over that limb until the blackening of the pressure has gone away, and leave it for several days, and run from it when it has subsided; this is useful.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Finally care for the area until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or the limb, make them sit in a position where they can contain water according to what is done in the ankle swelling.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the manner of cold water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.</end_of_turn
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and caustic not extinct of both equal parts, and grind them and leave them in a new bath from which the part of the leaves should be perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that enters into them ray.</end_of_turn
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And leave the other part of the bath another bath of water, and put on that alkali and caustic alive from lukewarm water which you take for a thumb, and when you have pressed them with the thumb for a good compression, and when you have left the whole of what comes out of the acute water in the part of the leaves to the other bath.</end_of_turn
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and get another live caustic and another alkali renewed, because that every hour if it remains in movement will have a strong acute quality, which is administered in surgical operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other limbs, because this operation is like fire.</end_of_turn
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And so of some medicines which are cauterized widely, such as turmeric, ginger, alum, and caustic with saffron that they should be mixed together.</end_of_turn
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And behold the account of an ancient man of the operation and care with which he is cured of ankle and sciatica pain, and he magnify that it is not necessary for any other care, and that he is healed for a whole week just as recommended, because he felt that strong thread in the bath already suffices for that.</end_of_turn
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it should be near certain vinegar, and if it is not found green, take recent figs; and do not grind it with a little of gray and keep it on the ankle where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the limb, and bind it.</end_of_turn
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the amount of three hours or for the amount that the patient gives up the pressure.</end_of_turn
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that in the bath and therefore when the limb of the patient is browned, remove that from the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healed.</end_of_turn
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use these cautery instruments except for the evacuation of the limb.</end_of_turn
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May I say that when a vein is stretched from a goat’s horn is cauterized, take advantage of that well; and make the cautery with this manner: take wool and soak it in olive oil, and leave it between the toes of the foot and between the heel.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then repeat this process and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and relieves the pain
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cautery of the cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cautery of two pains.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in the two limbs are caused by various causes, such as wounds or bruises or excessive evacuation, and for such causes as these, for the infusion of hot and wet matter
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterize only in this single species which is caused by the effusion of hot matter
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore cover, evacuate the disease with pills that are fixed and similar to them, that are beneficial over the two in which the pain is three lines according to their latitude, because if it has to be cauterized in any line or more, according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the remedy
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cautery is beneficial as point cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cautery needles in the middle according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIIII
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of the cautery at the beginning of gonorrhea
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease is seen in young children; and the sign of the beginning of the disease in children is that it affects the structure around the anus, causing elevation and difficulty in movement
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And others in the back are the bones of the two thighs that already begin to overcome the others bones
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore when you sometimes see this and you wish to prevent it, then cauterize that which is circular according to this form
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that it surrounds the cautery over the entire part of the bone without damaging it
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the bone with two-line or three-line point cautery
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And take care of the area until it is healed with the water that we have said
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Beware that the cautery is not administered in gonorrhea that is caused by spasm of nerves
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cautery of gout and joint pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore when gout is caused by heat it is cured by means of treatment and not by remaining silent, for the pain persists until it is cauterized
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And that you cauterize the area of evacuation around the ankle with the needles that are not cauterized
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of the olive oil:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains go up to the knees or to the other joints, and when these things happen, then cauterize that which is over every painful area with three or four needles of this olive oil
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if these needles are not enough for you, then cauterize that and do not hold your hand too close to the cautery, but rather only as much as is necessary to keep the area still
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains go up to the heel of the foot, then administer the cautery that we have said in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the great toe, and it is called sugra, then point in the circuit of the bones as if you were rotating, point in those two lines
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in these places, then point on the circumference of the bones over every bone and over the side of the hand
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If pain persists close to the joints for several days, or to the bones or muscles, then cauterize all those which are affected throughout the body.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the patient promptly without a good regimen and medication, for if there is a good regimen and inflammation, it is evacuated with this cautery without any other medicine, God helps.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xlv.	Capital letter xlv.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cautery of ruptures.</end_of_turn>
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the rupture is in the ankle and saying the bones are dented under the heel bone, and when it begins to approach, then command the patient to lie down and use soft cushions so that the wound does not open from the belly.</end_of_turn
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient between your thighs on the two sides, and command them to keep their thighs closed until the bone is fractured or the heel bone or the intestine appears.</end_of_turn
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And return the intestines that are said and secure with a grasp at the fracture on the fifth bone and signal the limb that appears similar to a half circle of the circumference of the body.</end_of_turn
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus is the form of the cautery:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is neither too rough nor too fine.</end_of_turn
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</end_of_turn
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And pause the cautery on that signal with your hand on the cautery, and when you have fractured the fifth bone within the middle of the heel bone; repeat thus until you have achieved in this attempt what you did not achieve in the first attempt within the heel bone.</end_of_turn
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And watch cautiously from the beginning of the cautery, that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient there does not result in death or any great evil.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And be aware that when you are making the cautery you do not touch the bone, do not trust your operation.</end_of_turn>
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And cover the cautery of children should be subtle according to the age and measure of them.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the area of the cautery for three days with borders until the wound of the fire is healed.</end>
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of those who are with other ailments until they are healed.</end>
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should rest on the two thighs for forty days until the area is sealed and the wound is healed.</end>
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And cover that you abstain from food for the length of the patient's recovery, which lines the belly of the patient, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.</end
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to take the patient away after forty days, give him nourishing food appropriately, and keep him for another forty days.</end
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Be attentive to work and replacement of food and drink, and of harsh voices, for when you use this regimen of healing the whole patient will be healed.</end>
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	I say the treatment of fractures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and do not move, for when you make the cautery of that with the round cautery as much as is necessary; and what is extruded from the navel thus as from the third part. And take care of that which we have said, and do not be adjusted.</end>
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already said that the first fracture is cauterized with a triangular cautery in this way, because it is signaled with a grasp:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a stop line that is parallel to the width at the level of the fracture, and another line at the base; and hold your hand with a claw cautery, more the first cautery is finer and better.</end>
Capitol .xlvi.	Capital letter xlvi.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cautery of torsions.</end_of_turn
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When in limbs for some case or for percussion there is pain and it persists for a long time and does not yield to treatment with medicines, then command to cauterize with a pointed cautery.</end>
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if the first burn is successful, it is well; otherwise, repeat the burn several times; for it is known that these pains often arise from a swelling of the limb itself, so that by burning close to the source of the pain, one can bring relief to all the surrounding parts.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.</end_of_turn>
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery of leprosy.</end_of_turn>
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Many books speak of a great benefit in burning for leprosy, and management if the species of leprosy that causes putrefaction of fat and melancholy is present.</end_of_turn
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore when you wish to burn [leprosy], consider if the leprosy is acute or chronic; and that which has been cured by water as we have said in the division and not by burning, neither this nor that; and fear lest the corruption should encompass the whole body and its entirety, for the burn should be applied to the head with two cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one at the back of the head, over the eyebrows; and two on the temples; and one at the back, over the nape of the neck or on the servant's hand.</end_of_turn
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally hold your hand over the burn for a little while until a small ulcer forms on the bone, and when the scales are loosened from it, so that the emission of thick vapor is relieved from it; and burn on the heel as required.</end_of_turn
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifest, the hour is that you burn in these very burns that we have said in the head; and burn on the tip of the nose, and two burns on the two cheekbones, and two burns on two vertebrae of the collarbone, and five burns on the vertebrae of the thorax, and one large one on the vertebrae close to the shoulder, and one on the shoulder, and two on the arms, and two on the hands, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the little toes; and burn on all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on all the bones of the limbs and on the bones of the face.</end_of_turn
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And take care of the nerves that are over the heel that you do not burn them.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And many are cauterized with a burn on the bone of the thumb and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the heel.</end_of_turn
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that when you adjust many cauteries, the more the benefit and the more effective; and know that the body has already become stupefaied from the pain.</end_of_turn
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the burns should be large or small according to the members and the joints as it is preceded by the species of the instruments.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the burn with flour of barley mixed with honey and with another care until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cautery of stupor.</end_of_turn
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is stiff or drowsy and is cured with medicines, oils and plasters, and is not healed, the hour is that you burn that stiff limb with a burn according to the greatness of the limb or the smallness of it.</end_of_turn
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the burn should be applied to the heel entering the stiffness of the heel a little.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And many are cauterized every stupor which is caused by the fingers and toes, and the vertebrae of the thorax and sometimes the sensation of the nerves that move that limb, and is relieved of the stupor.</end_of_turn
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	More do not presume than one who is skilled in the anatomy of the limb and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLVIV.</end_of_turn
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cautery of the carbuncle that is eating away.</end_of_turn
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the carbuncle is old and does not yield to the touch of medicines, the hour is that you burn over that which has been cauterized before a little according to the quantity of the species of the heel until the whiteness and the color of it are restored, and the color of it is changed.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And apply a cataplasm of barley flour, lentils, olive oil, rue leaves, and columb or yeronda flowers, each in equal parts, and mix them together. Then apply a bandage and keep it in place until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	And apply a cataplasm of barley flour, lentils, olive oil, rue leaves, and columb or yeronda flowers, each in equal parts, and mix them together. Then apply a bandage and keep it in place until it is healed.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and swelling appears, then cauterize that area of circle around the circumference of the vein as it is swollen.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And say the learned that it is cauterized at the end of the vein in the middle of the area; may it be that I do not see that it is ulcerated, for I have already seen several veins that have been cauterized.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize in the circumference of the vein as I have said, rather than to burn the vein entirely.
Capitol .li.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And apply a cataplasm of barley flour, lentils, olive oil, rue leaves, and columb or yeronda flowers, each in equal parts, and mix them together. Then apply a bandage and keep it in place until it is healed
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adjuvants are delayed in maturity, and this is due to excessive moisture or for the state of the patient, who is old and decrepit, or for little strength, or for the time, and you wish to hasten the maturity of the adjuvants; then cauterize in the circumference of the vein without burning the vein entirely. And thus it will stop fasting in maturity
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	May you also pierce the area that is to be cauterized, for this is the form of it. And suspend that in the middle of the area of adjuvants until it penetrates the cord.</start_of_turn>
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize in that place that is more distant, to alleviate the pain of the limb; then take care that it is done until it is healed
Capitol .lii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	And apply a cataplasm of barley flour, lentils, olive oil, rue leaves, and columb or yeronda flowers, each in equal parts, and mix them together. Then apply a bandage and keep it in place until it is healed
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a wandering corruption in the limb, which eats away at it just as fire consumes dry wood
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if sometimes that corrosion is in the place where you suffer from cauterization like fire, then you must burn the nails without many, and as many as seem appropriate in that place where it is corroding
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And take care to cauterize all around until you have eradicated all the corruption and there remains no cause of it
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And keep it like that for three days, and suspend on the cauterized places only after three days with olive oil mixed in until the scars have disappeared and all the corruption has been eradicated
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And take care that there is no inflammation of the surrounding flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	May three days pass before the flesh recovers completely in the place where there is no corruption; for if not, then repeat the cauterization over the parts that remain corrupted
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated in many ways with acute medicine, which is more effective in the place of cauterization
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	Fire cauterization is more dangerous than acute medicine
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that which has been ordered for it
Capitol .liii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	And apply a cataplasm of barley flour, lentils, olive oil, rue leaves, and columb or yeronda flowers, each in equal parts, and mix them together. Then apply a bandage and keep it in place until it is healed
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many veins in the lower part of the foot that are called claw suffer from great pain, which is caused by large swelling; and this is treated in two ways, that is, by fire and by cold water
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	It is better to cauterize with fire than with a blunt instrument, as it is more painful; and it should be done with a needle of suitable size for the whole claw, and with fine stripes
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And quickly extinguish the flame on the claw, and immediately reverse your hand over the area of the claw until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And keep it for three days until it starts to get better
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And immediately apply a paste of beaten salt and vinegar to the wound, and keep the paste on the wound for one night, so that the pus will be eradicated from its roots
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound by applying ointment of generative ointment until it is healed
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not improve, and black spots appear on the surface of the body, mostly on the hands and feet, it is necessary that you administer in those places with water, that is to say that you take a sponge or a quill or a sponge of pepper, and put that on the claw; and quickly pour a little water over the sponge, and hold your hand, and reverse that so that you compress your hand completely, and press the edge of the sponge against the root of the claw, and return the warm water slowly through the opening of the root; and wait for the patient a little the biting of the warm water for an hour, and then remove it, for the claw will have its roots eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do with the others until you have finished all of them that are in the body
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And take care of the pus that remains after the roots of the claws have been eradicated by the water of the incisions that the ointment will generate
Capitol .liiii.	The end.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cautery of the tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When the cause of the tremor is cold in the nerves or from excessive heat, or from another similar cause, it is necessary that you cauterize four times on the spine between each vertebra, and four times on the toes, and four times on the stomach
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor will cease and the disease will be overcome
Capitol .lv.	The end of the treatise
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery of wounds of the body accidentally inflicted
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are spilled blood clots in the body, and pus-filled wounds that are caused by corrupted thick matter; therefore it is necessary at the beginning when it appears that they should be cauterized over the whole head of the fistula with a fine needle and a loop of wire, or at the root of the fistula longus; or with a fine needle.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And in some cases it is necessary to cauterize immediately at the beginning of their evacuation according to this manner; and do not be afraid, for the superfluous blood will be broken by these means, and the wound will be healed of these
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless it is necessary to evacuate with a tube of flebotomy
Capitol lvi.	End of the treatise
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cautery of a fistula of the saints accidentally caused by an incision of the artery
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times there is an artery fistula that is caused by the disease that is causing the plague, or by the incision of apostemas or cautery of the limb, and in such cases it is difficult to stop it
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when such an accident happens, quickly cover your hand over the orifice of the artery, and pause over that place until you have stopped the bleeding of the fistula of the saint, and that it does not remain
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And immediately pause in the flame the cauteries of olive oil a few and many, by number more, and blow over those until they are no longer ignited
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And immediately take from those a little or a great according to the place and the disease in which the artery is broken, over that vein tightly holding back the bleeding that remains until the wound is closed and that the saint is withdrawn.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the saint is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you have closed the wound and squeezed out the cautery, then take another cautery and cover it loosely over the cauteries that are in the fire, and do not cease doing so until the saint is withdrawn
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Be careful that you do not burn the nerves that are here, and that you come back to the patient with another disease.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you know that when an artery bursts a saint, it is not possible in those circumstances to restrict the saint, and especially when the artery is great, if not with one of the following four means: or with that which has been said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the limbs are burnt and the saint is withdrawn, or that it be bound with thread or a ligament for strong support, or that they be held with medicines whose virtue is to restrict the saint; and that they be strengthened by applying pressure with a cushion or cushion-like device.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May he who administers restrictions decent of him and limits stricture with draps or by position of causes comburentz and of semblance, do not confer except with wrath.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If he is not a doctor and has no medicine, when he understands that the opening has been made over that vein as we have said, he must understand that the patient is in great distress, for the sovereign remedy of the plague has passed, and that the wound must not be remade; and that it should be washed with cold water until the wound is healed and hardened; and that he must take care that there is no need for cautery or other medicine.</end_of_turn>
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second section.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and winds and of phlegm and of plagues and of their appearances.</end_of_turn>
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucazes.</end_of_turn>
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases in which cautery is convenient and medicine is comburent, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for them in the forms of cautery; and I have ordered the chapters of the sovereignty of the head to the feet.</end_of_turn
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter with that measure, so that what is desired may be alleviated, when it has been demanded.</end_of_turn
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And I say that in this chapter there is terror concerning what is in the first chapter of cautery.</end_of_turn
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason great caution must be taken, because in the operation in this chapter many things are to be avoided, such as the evacuation of the intestines which is with the saint with which life is bound up, the bursting of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of pus, the extraction of a splinter or the incision of a stone or any other similar thing.</end_of_turn
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these things are accompanied by fear and tremor and in most of them death.</end_of_turn
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you that you should not be terrified of this, because many veined persons have managed to perform these things without any other casualties than those of the disease.</end_of_turn
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is from these that some recover from their disease, and it is lighter for them than death, and this is for the gentleness of their disease, and for the length of their disease, and for the fear of the disease which means death.</end_of_turn
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from these things is that which gives you hope and speech, your expectation of that saint, and the swiftness of your disease is pernicious.</end_of_turn>
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not consent to any one who uses this method; and your caution should be greater than your desire and your speed; and do not presume any cause except for a certain knowledge which will inform you what you must do, and to which you may expect success.</end_of_turn
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the care of all sick people the prognosis and indication which are the salvation of health and the obtaining of fame and memory, of the savior and of glory.</end_of_turn
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God inspires you with his understanding and does not command you except with direction and protection, for what is in his hand.</end_of_turn>
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to the order of the chapter of cautery, from the head to the feet, so that what you desire of what you need be alleviated.</end_of_turn
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the care of water which is contained in the head of children.</end_of_turn
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Be wise that this disease does not usually happen to children until the nurse opens the head of the child, when its life is in danger.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And there are many veined persons for whom the cause is unknown.</end_of_turn
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease except in children; and with all those whom I have seen it has been accompanied by death, and for this reason I consider it my work to leave it behind in those.</end_of_turn
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, the head of which was always swollen until it could not be closed except with difficulty by the great size of the head, and that even when it was closed the moisture increased until death.</end_of_turn
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the cartilage and the bone, or is added outside the bone over the braincase.</end_of_turn
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation is performed in such a place where the humidity is between the navel and the knee and the apostemes are few, it is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the thigh with a fissure extending two notches beyond the level of the humidity. This is the form of the scar.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is more increased and the apostemes are great, it is necessary to make two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is left on the bone, a sign of this is that you sometimes open the roof of the head or the water is squeezed out when you press that area with your thumb against the sides and it is not that which is seen on the face.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Therefore make three incisions in the middle of the thigh according to this method
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And immediately extract all the humidity; then strengthen the incisions with strips and gauze; then pour oil and wine over the wound from above and olive oil from below for five days; then remove the ligatures and care for the wound with attempts and poultices, and strengthen the thigh equally; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.</end_of_turn>
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	There is another method of incision which considers the size of the apostemes and the collection of the water, for some veins are more prominent in the occiput or in the front, or on the right or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostemes appear and the collection of the water, and make the incision as small as possible.</end_of_turn>
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	Observe that you must not incision the artery, and be careful that no blood flows out, and keep the patient still for that flow of blood with the evacuation of the humidity.
Capitol .ii.	The text ends here.</start_of_turn>
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	As for the incisions of the arteries which are near the ankles, they are called hilasseyssae.
Capitol segon.	The text ends here.</start_of_turn>
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are multiple ulcers or tumors on the heels or toes, and it is old, and you do not trust in the cure of medicines, the best cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.</start_of_turn>
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Therefore take care when you wish to make the incision that the patient does not move his head, and strengthen the ankle joint with rough hands; and consider where the vein is placed; and the places where some are near the ankles depressed, so that you do not damage them.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And take care of the surrounding vessels with attempts, and make incisions of some part that is acutely painful at the incision to reach the bone, and be as little invasive as possible.</start_of_turn
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, within the scar leave the artery and tie the others at the incisions to the parts below.</start_of_turn>
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, for when any vein is incised the blood is ejected with a pulsatile flow, which leaps from side to side frequently.</start_of_turn
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	More if the artery does not appear at the incision, take care that you measure the ankle three fingers wide, and take care with attempts, and make it reach the bone.</start_of_turn
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And as for the amount of blood that comes from the wound is the quantity of one cup.</start_of_turn And it is little or much that comes from it according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of them.</start_of_turn
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And take care of the wound, and therefore if anything remains on the bone concerning the wound, the incision must be made so that no further swelling appears.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the wound with gauze and silk threads, and care for that which is inside until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .iii.	The text ends here.</start_of_turn
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.</start_of_turn
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are some old accidents that remain ancient or acute, for humors of the earth and for the quality in the lacerations of the temples, or so ancient and similar to these, and when these cannot be cured by the methods of medical care and what is not comfortable, then we must resort to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or the cauterization of these veins as we have shown.</start_of_turn
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient raises the parts that are in the temples; and understand that the visible artery in the temple is that which is shown to you by the thumb, and that which is hidden is only in a few people by force of heat.</start_of_turn
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden from you, the hour of the patient's suffering is when their limbs become strong with some warmth; and immediately cool the area with an rough sponge or evaporate it with cold water until the swelling subsides.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And thus you take the sponge which is its shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And immediately put the sponge on the area which facilitates until you reach the swelling; and immediately take hold of the area upwards and outwards so that you extract that from the bony parts until you extract that from the tendon and uncover that from the clothes which you have left behind, from all parts.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	May be if the artery is small, the hour involves covering that with the limb, and immediately cut off a piece of that according to the quantity by which the limb is elongated and contracted, and do not allow blood to flow, for if it is not cut off, the blood will not be restored at all.</start_of_turn>
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And immediately evacuate blood from the vessel a little.</start_of_turn within three.</start_of_turn
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the swelling is great, the hour is to cover that in two places with strong double cloth or cords of length, and do not cover it up until the decay has ceased and the swelling has subsided.</start_of_turn
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And immediately remove the excess which is between two ligaments; and do this in that hour or do it at another time.</start_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that which is pointed towards the bone which is pointed towards the nail until the limb is healed, and leave in place instead of that work.</start_of_turn
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better work if the patient has a fever or is suffering from inflamed swelling; for the cautery is of those causes which help the humors to vanish, and therefore it is better in treatment.</start_of_turn
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover immediately the extraction of the arteries which you see at the ankle, and keep them covered with fine powder sufficiently to prevent them from bleeding, and immediately apply either a cure with dry medications or make an ointment of herbs to make the wound heal and soften the swelling until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another wound begins to bleed from the artery, the hour is to restrict that bleeding, either by cautery or by tying off the artery, or by packing the wound, and hold your hand firmly until the bleeding has ceased.</start_of_turn
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present, the hour is to keep the limb still as mentioned above until the bleeding has ceased, and then immerse the limb in cold water of violent coldness until the pain subsides, and strengthen it as much as you cover.</start_of_turn
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more curious in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein in this way having two nails, since you have marked the two places with a touch, and you remove whatever is between them, not burning, until you reach the bone and split the vein in two places, so that it is elongated between the limbs which are not consolidated at all by this cautery.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:</start_of_turn
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the pain of the two nails is intense.</start_of_turn
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	More importantly, if the pain is less intense than two nails, it is better, for if the pain is acute like two nails close to each other, the flesh is not burned with speed.</start_of_turn
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore when there is some thickness, keep the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is scaldingly separated.</start_of_turn
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in every work and more comfortable.</start_of_turn
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two nails is the quantity of the thickness of the finger.</start_of_turn
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.</start_of_turn>
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the care of the limbs of the acute and acidic humors of the bones.</start_of_turn
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the acidic humors are present, and it is the limb of those veins which are above the cap of the phalanx, and you do not care for any cause of the medical treatment, and sometimes the face of the patient already swells up and lies in front of the walk like a walk of ants, and the bones of that limb are extended, humify so much that they are recognized as already known, and the nails are scorched by the intensity of the tears, which were formerly recommended in the treatment of those of this operation, but now I do not know any other treatment for this.</start_of_turn
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to scrape the nails against the ones which are in the heel, and immediately make three incisions equally distant according to the length of the face.</start_of_turn
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fracture is two fingers: one fracture should be at a distance equal to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelashes which are on the lacrimal space, and the third from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Keep your hand away from the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of any incision is equal to three fingers adjusted
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a pad of sponge or dry cloth attached to it, moisten it with the things which are with which you will cleanse the wound
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then bring together the edge of two sharp extremities, from which this is the shape of the incision of them:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the lower part of the temples to the second incision
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract from that all the marrow which is between two incisions on the bone, and place that which is over the bone on the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And place again this pad and put into the first incision another instrument which is called curette, blunt from one side and pointed on the other side
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Close the wound of the bone which is attached to the marrow from the bone which is in front of it, and the skin which does not reach the bone, and fill that up until it reaches the fracture which has just been made, and close with all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Maybe the incision should be continued until the marrow, and place that which is in the middle of the fracture inside the other fracture
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the wound has healed, press the area of the bones of the wound with cotton wool
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And keep in any fracture a coat of old cloth, and place over those powders soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and anything which does not cause a burn.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the ligament and administer great effusion of warm water or tepid, and take care that there be oil of basilisk with rosemary and other things which will make the wounds heal.
Capitol .v.	End of book. V
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Concerning the care of the limbs from the parts which descend from the temples of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the limb bones are acute and continue, and sometimes the bones of the patient’s foot extend slightly, and in these cases the custom is to take precautions, for the palpebras are ulcerated and their socket is painful, and in the front of the head there is sudden pain of toothache and subsequent vomiting, due to the fact that the matters and bones do not circulate but by veins from the parts which proceed downwards
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best care for these is that the patient should eat softly, and immediately make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a little for the width (and begin from the left temporal bone to the right temporal bone; and let the incision be from the bone; and stretch your hand from the temples which are grasped by the teeth). Until the bone is exposed
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Extract all the marrow from the wound with sponge or dry cloth and immediately replace between the two lips of the fracture with old cloth or linen cloth
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately put on them powders soaked in wine and oil to prevent a burn
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When you have removed that and you see that the swelling has already diminished, the time has come to cool the bones until they begin to regain their flesh, and take care of that which regulates the exsiccation which makes the flesh grow, as if you were taking two parts of wheat and four parts of barley and mixing them together, or, make plaster of them and administer it to these wounds when the flesh has been reborn
Capitol .vi.	End of book. VI
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Concerning the care of what is in the ankles
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All the causes which are in the ankles are of four kinds, which are either mineral stones or which resemble stones, such as iron and lead, or which are of plant origin such as fennel or peas, or which are of a fluid origin such as vinegar and wine and which resemble them, or any beast
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore when a stone is in the ankle or any other cause which does not adjust or grow in the ankle, and if sometimes the stone comes out in such a cause as oil or vinegar or saw dust, and immediately administer the extraction of it, and make it vomit with condiment, and apply pressure to the wound to prevent further vomiting.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And so keep your hand over the ankle and remove some of the wool or cloth from around it, since thickened matters cause pain in these parts.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not painful, then administer extraction from it with the instrument called epicaricary spoon, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is thickened with the spoon, it is enough; otherwise, administer the extraction from it with little duplication.</start_of_turn>
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if it is not thickened by that, then make a needle of gut and insert the end of the needle into the hole of the ankle and close around the needle with wax and olive oil so that only the needle remains visible.</start_of_turn>
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And so draw out from the belly with strong traction, since thickened matters are like those that we have recounted.</start_of_turn
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not thickened in this manner, then take a lighted splinter or a piece of burnt wood and grasp the nails with a quantity of powder, and place that on the edge of the wound, and wrap around it adequately.</start_of_turn
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And so insert it into the hole of the ankle easily, and then extract the ankle from the moisture.</start_of_turn
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if it is not thickened by all the causes that we have recounted, then you must consider cutting off that which is causing the swelling or spasm.</start_of_turn
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting off that which is causing the swelling is to cauterize the inflamed vein and extract it according to the virtue of the instruments, and then make a small incision in the heel and convert the ankle to the parts above, and make a small fissure in the heel and let out the black matter from it.</start_of_turn
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be like a crescent moon until it reaches the bone, and when the bone is grasped, hold that back with the instruments at hand; and immediately close the incision at that moment, and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the swelling in the ankle is one of the humors that grows and inflates, then administer the curage and the extraction of it; but if you do not obey our advice immediately, then take sponge-baths of this sort:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the evacuation of that humor which is causing the swelling in the ankle.</start_of_turn
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not hesitate when you think that that has already been moistened by the vapor of the ankle, and keep it in thick masses, and draw out the rest with nails or with a spoon, or by incision as we have said, for the extraction is alleviated.</start_of_turn
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water in which it is introduced into the ankle, so that the pain uses up its spasm at the beginning, and fill the ankle with about one cubit of old clothes, and hold over that ankle in which the water is, and if by that it is thickened, it is not good; otherwise, take three or four nails of the length of the finger, and burn them in the fire a little, and when they are cold put one of those into the hole of the ankle and jump over one leg of that side and strike the other leg against the leg which is causing the ankle.</start_of_turn
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop until all the water is thickened.</start_of_turn>
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is thickened like this, then you take paper or gut.</start_of_turn And put one extremity into the ankle and extend the other extremity over the fire until it is burnt out the most of it.</start_of_turn
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And so put in another gut and draw out the water until all the water is thickened, and then extract that with a needle as is said to be the extracting bone.</start_of_turn
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beasts entering that ankle, if it is small in size, hold it firmly and keep it still, care for it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes pain at the same time, then administer the extraction from it with instruments and nails, and the cause of the pain is less severe than all the other causes that cause swelling in the ankle.</start_of_turn
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms engendered in the ankle, when you have cared for that as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and you do not suffer your cure, then consider that you must request the ankle to the sun.</start_of_turn
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Therefore, if there appears here any cause of the worms, then extract that with instruments or with fine needles, but if no cause appears, then take a needle with a broad handle of which this is the form.</start_of_turn
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	The patient's foot is affected by a severe inflammatory swelling caused by cold humors. The physician must make an incision along the ankle bone according to the degree of swelling; then he must drain the abscess with a pointed instrument, taking care not to damage the surrounding tissue.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey my advice, know that I have closed the circuit of the vein with wax as we have said; now administer the distillations that have already been prepared in the care of the worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be like the one that expels the medicinal oils from the ankle with this instrument of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or gold, leaving a slight space, in which there is a small hole, and place a piece of gauze over it.</start_of_turn>
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus do as it is said in order that it be in the cavity of the ankle here where it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the limb adequately, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ankle, or juice of any herb, or whatever you wish of these medicines in the vein — and that is in the ankle — and then insert the ray into the coto and press with your hand that which is at compression at the same time as the oil is expelled from the cavity of the ankle and the patient feels the oil remaining inside.</start_of_turn>
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is infused into the ankle is already scorched with fire a little.</start_of_turn
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And keep in mind that the cause for which you distill in the ankle should not be too strong, because the ankle medicines do not suffer from that.</start_of_turn
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the care of the swelling of the ankles.</start_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some veins of young children and some veins of elder people are not perforated; and when they already happen in veins of adult men, swelling in the ankle for pain or for nothing in particular; and this swelling is useful in the preparation of the wound of the ankle which does not always succeed, and some are in the distant parts.</start_of_turn
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the preparation of them, which does not always succeed, is in the greatest possibilities of difficult healing.</start_of_turn
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that in which you succeed, keep the ankle of the patient to the sun and rest in that.</start_of_turn
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if sometimes the swelling appears, open that with a pointed instrument of which this is the form.</start_of_turn
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the limb in which it is small has a sharp and a blunt part; and the abscess is of two lips like a lion so that it does not damage the ankle.</start_of_turn
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And thus if the swelling is for a wound that has been born in the ankle or in the meat of the limb, then do that with fine nails and pierce that with ease until all the flesh is gone.</start_of_turn
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the preparation of the ankle, then take a ray like a lion and burn that a little, and then put that on the meat of the ankle.</start_of_turn
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you smell swelling with that which the patient finds with ease, because of gravity, try to compress that with ease; and keep in mind that you must not damage the nerves of the ankle.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And thus keep the ankle wrapped around like the amount of the breadth of the wound which you have enveloped with Egyptian unguent; and do that for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or that you take some other thing and put that in oil and grind over it and use that; and if sometimes the ankle has already healed, then do that cover that which you took out and change that for another which you have wrapped in cerate that is useful with olive oil, until that which is apostematized has given way; and keep that until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If there happens to be flux of pus, then immerse sponges or cloth in cold water and place over the ankle, and use another treatment which restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillations.</start_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.</start_of_turn
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the care of the styes which are attached to the eyelids.</start_of_turn
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The styes which are attached to the eyelashes are some wet and some dry.</start_of_turn
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore cover those with whom you hold or support, and uncover those with whom you wish to leave, and immediately pause over the affected area.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Maybe if pain comes from the flow of blood, then you cauterize those who are loose like barley grains.</end_of_turn>
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is that the black blisters and the like disappear when any cause of their origin has disappeared; and when they are cauterized with fire, those origins are consumed and do not return.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .ix.	(The text ends here.)</end_of_turn>
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Great pain that comes to the pupils of the eyes.</end_of_turn>
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Black blisters arise on the pupils of the eyes for any cause that resembles greatness in its strength and hardness, and because of this greatness it is called.</end_of_turn
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of great humidity in the eyelid outwards and downwards.</end_of_turn
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation for them is that you consider if the greatness is proceeding from them from outside the eye and is widespread; and the cause of it is slight.</end_of_turn
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore remove from that on which the fissure is made for the breadth, and quickly drain that from all around so that it escapes easily, and then suspend that which is on the outside and cut away that.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not uncover the beginning of the disease if you do not pierce the eye with a slight incision little by little, the hour it will not be noticed in any cause.</end_of_turn
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is great, the hour you adjust it with a suture; and care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is slight, do not overdo it for that because the language of it restores that and nourishes.</end_of_turn
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatness is waning at the margins of the eye you must touch the surface of the eye, the hour you remove the eye and suspend the greatness all over, except that you do not touch the origin, and cut away that from all around, and if the eye is injured by the incision, the hour it will not be noticed in any cause.</end_of_turn
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And finally, at the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and care for the area of the eye where it has healed until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .x.	(The text ends here.)</end_of_turn
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Concerning the care of the outside of the eye from the pupil downwards.</end>
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Grayish is what is generated in the tunics of the eye downwards, and especially in children, aggravates the eyes of those who suffer from it and causes them to blur; and it does not permit the clarity of the sun because the tears are hidden by them.</end>
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason sometimes those who walk around always keep their eyes open, and over those who sleep; and over the eyes of those who leave them their eyebrows wet, which have already covered the inflammation, and imminent appearance of inflammation is in the eye; and that when you press on the area around it says that there is inflammation within those.</end
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And any way of operating is in that one in which the patient’s eye rests on the palm of the hand, and you quickly touch it and make it callous, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains all the matter of the circle, and quickly touch that over that and cut from all around so that it is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and finally remove that humidity that is incident on the fissure made for the breadth, and the fissure should not be greater than the fissure that is made in flaccidity.</end
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Therefore before you make the incision cover the whole circumference until you reach the matter, because in the meantime the process of the matter will proceed by fissure according to the shape of white grease.</end>
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore extract that which you wrap around which you have enveloped between the thumbs and the little fingers and rotate between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.</end
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And take care that you do not make the incision too wide so that the matter does not reach the pupil and remove that.</end
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see the matter at the beginning of the incision, just make the incision slightly wider so that the matter is processed; and quickly extract that which we have said; and then cover it with a drape of cloth and wine vinegar and pause it over the area and open those which are dusty.</end
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so when you have finished salt and paused that in the concavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity.</end
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the one who is well.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Even if the limb is scorched by the cautery, care for the one who has healed well.</end_turn>
Capitol .xi.	End of document.</start_of_turn>
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Instructions for handling the patient.</start_of_turn
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the humors in the eyes become natural and old, the hour of the disease approaches, and tears become frequent, mucus of the eyes and skin arise from this, that is, that the humors that cause destruction of the eye that is called to be evacuated from the eye. Care for the eye in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine as is said before in the chapter of cautery; or by incision and suture; or by cannas as I will say.</start_of_turn
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore keep your hand over the patient’s head; convert the eye of the patient with your left hand, and if it is converted, well and good; otherwise, prick in the part where it is faithful to the limb beyond the margin of the eye where the humors go out, and make the needle penetrate the faithful part downwards, and when it has penetrated as far as—about the margin of the eye where the humors go out—about the humors, pull the thread downwards from the parts above the eye, and convert that part to the ray.</start_of_turn
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And so make an incision in the part behind the eye where the greater lacrimal hangs down to the lesser lacrimal; and extract the thread and leave the eye covered with small fragments of lead or saffron, and then put your hand over the eye like the figure of a laurel leaf.</start_of_turn
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, keep in mind that the figure must be according to the degree of elevation of the eye, for in men it is different, for in some it is necessary to make an incision of the greater quantity of the eye according to the quantity of moisture for which the eye is softened.</start_of_turn
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And so make an incision at the two lines that you have marked, starting from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal.</start_of_turn
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the incision is made about the humors naturally as in the greatness of the king.</start_of_turn
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And so put the sponge in one of the two angles of the eyebrow, and extract that whole, and adjust with the suture the two lips with gut or silk thread, and withdraw the intestines, and make adhere what is superfluous of the threads over two eyebrows with some cause that you consider, if you wish to do so, and if not, do not cure.</start_of_turn
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And so read the sutures of the threads within three or four days, and care for the eye.</start_of_turn
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the dressing loose from the sutures, and care for the one who has been relieved of the swelling and constriction, because the eye is lifted beyond the seal of the dressing and the adhesion of the humors; in fact, old practice teaches.</start_of_turn
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in general it is requested about the patient, and it is a good operation, and do not be afraid.</start_of_turn
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in treating the eye, which is that you sign on the eye like a laurel leaf, and then raise the eye with three nails separated and joined in this way:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if this is not possible, have the nails, and that which is not blunt, the hour take a needle in which there is thread and put that into the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread beside the greater lacrimal, and the thread according to beside the lesser lacrimal, and adjust between the folds of the thread with equality, and then put your hand over the above-mentioned elevation, elevate the whole eyebrow as high as you have recommended.</start_of_turn
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And so adjust the two lips of the dressing with suture, and care for the one who has healed well.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if after the incision you notice that there is still swelling from your incision or your cut, leave that swelling until it has gone down and keep it moist.</start_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Every kind of vegetable that has been placed on the eye that has remained there because of the suture, where you must use what we have said about incision; in fact, suture is more artificial.</start_of_turn
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To remove the suture is in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And that you convert the eye and split the figure as I have recounted; and then make two small incisions or two fine needles whose length is according to the length of the eye and the width is less than the width of the sponge.</start_of_turn
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already opened the extremities of each limb, where you have the nails.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some external support to the area above the nail, and bind the nails of each limb tightly, leaving the nails free for a few days, so that the pain from the tight binding will subside.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Even if it is late, cut off the source of the pain, and then treat the wound until it is healed
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidified, the nail is elevated and the area is no longer painful.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is how you should bind two nails in this way:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and take care that the length and width are neither too great nor too small
Capitol .xii.	End of text.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the nail has been elevated and the wound has hardened, the pain will be relieved in the nail area.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the nails are unnatural, rough and painful, the doctor's operation for them is that you take a pointed instrument and place it on that area of fat and bone, and then that you stretch the limb and nails without causing them harm
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the nails should be equal to the width of a palm
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And do the same with another piece of gut and hold the limb firmly in place
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's hand on the belly if necessary, and let the sun witness your work, for it is a subtle and minor operation
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle at the base of the nail, which requires engineering, and make it penetrate the nail quickly until you extract the natural nail
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then draw out the nail and insert it into the alixate, and keep the nails for one or two or three, but no more
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then withdraw your hand from that area once the natural nail has been extracted along with the alixate from the nail bed
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If there is remaining alixate and the nail has not been extracted, remove the alixate from the limb along with the gut that you have placed there, until all the remaining alixate has been removed from the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And when the nail has been treated in this way, the swelling will disappear from the nail and the limb, the nails will cry out somewhat and swell up, and leave them closed for two or three days until the nail adheres to the flesh and heals over the wound
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the nail is too short, adjust it to the length of the natural nails, and elevate it until it is even with the surrounding skin, and keep it elevated until it has healed to a sufficient extent
Capitol .xiii.	End of text
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the care of the wound on the nail bed
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is inflammation in the nail, and the nail is contracted when it is bent to the right or left, due to poor consolidation of the wound or fracture or cutting, and if it is caused by leprosy, this is useful for consolidating the wound or fracture or cutting, or for preventing recurrence of the same
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The way to perform the operation is to make that consolidation and separate the layers of the nail, and keep it in place with a piece of silk or linen until it has healed
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not neglect to treat the underlying cause of the inflammation, which is constriction; for if you do not do this, the inflammation will return more violently than before
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	In such cases as these, use fennel as an emollient, and soak the bandage in water in which flaxseed and poppy seeds have been boiled, or in oil that has been liquefied with some of these elements, and immerse the wound in that, and care for it in this way
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The key to your care is that you do not perforate without proper engineering, as you did at the beginning
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	The operation that we have mentioned is nothing other than the correction of the deformation that does not restore the natural shape of the limb
Capitol .xiiii.	End of text
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the care of the wound on the nail bed
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This inflammation of the nail bed that is useful for treating the inflammation of the nail is called true inflammation; and it is either natural or accidental
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May the cause of the pain be accidental, from a wound or burn, from a cautery or from other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of performing the operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix that in the flesh, and that you pass the thread from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh from the parts under the needle and hold that with the needle, and puncture at a wide space.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if you return the figure of the eyelash according to what covers, it is not good; and if not, take the scissors and hold that in the cleft of the fissure, and over that convert the eyelash, and make two incisions on the side of the eyelash leaving
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And that the extremities of the two incisions make two angles of the incision, which you have made until they meet, and that the figure of them is made until when they converge is made figure again.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then hold the flesh that is left of the amount that is the width of the eyelash from the edge of the eye outwards, until the eyelash is cut
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of silk; and then care for those as we have said of the soothing medicines and the bandages that must be done to make it well
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it happens to deviate from a wound or suture or cautery, the hour cover that you make a superficial incision over the edge of the eyelash according to what is preceding.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the skin between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the care of inflammation when it is departing or leaving, that runs in their operation, according to how it is prepared in the manner of inflammation, and that is in the manner of various kinds of motas.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artists always prepare an instrument in any way that is possible for them until they make the figure return to its natural form, or in that way, and that disease according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the greatest availability
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.</end_of_turn>
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adherence of the eyelash to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.</end_of_turn>
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs to several men, it is necessary to solidify the eyelash more distant from the album of the hair, and to prohibit the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore cover that you remove the ray from the edge of the eyelash, and lift that up, or extend that with the nail.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you puncture the adhesion with a blunt instrument, which is not of the sharpness of the incisions, having made a small hole so that the disease is not disturbed during the operation, and leave the piece of skin that does not adhere to the hair in its sharpness.</end_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such as to avoid scraping that adhesion with ease until the eyelash is returned to its natural form and that the adhesion is completely healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put on the eye a solution of salt water; or distill into it from vinegar dissolved in water.</end_of_turn
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelash and the hair with a piece of gauze, and place over the hair a bandage of fat soaked in oil, and on the third day use astringents until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.</end_of_turn></end_of_turn>
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of the nail and the eminence of the flesh of the lacrimals.</end_of_turn
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Wise men know that the nail is according to two ways, that is either nervous or non-nervous. The nervous is like a hard, soft sponge; or it is non-nervous, like white humidity that is frozen, which when you touch it, or force it to take hold with the nail, it is torn and the nail is not held by it.</end_of_turn
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these species do not begin until from the greater lacrimal which goes little by little covering the sight and hinders its light and movement of the eye.</end_of_turn
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of working in the incision of these is that the disease suspends its sitting in the belly if it is necessary, and you touch the hairs of the eye, and lift the eyelash with your hand, and then collect the nail with a little pincher and extend that to the parts under.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and enter into that a hair of horse or of cat or of ox, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and keep that in the middle of the nail, and pierce that with the needle, and tie that with thread; and extend that to the parts under, and scrape with the skin the part of the nail that surrounds the pupil.</end_of_turn
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you should seize her with your hand at the back of her thighs.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should pierce her with your instrument at the root of the tear duct, either with a blunt needle or small forceps, and withdraw the natural tear from the tear duct so that at the beginning of this there is no further discharge of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And when the nail has become soft on the sole of the foot, as we have said, then you should evacuate it with a sponge of the kind that we have mentioned.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And take care that the sponge does not touch the cornea and that you avoid bursting it, and that the pupil is pierced.</start_of_turn>
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then return the incision with a pinch of coarse salt or by rubbing with fat, and withdraw that which has entered on the other side; and care for that which is inside so that it should heal.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you are unable to insert the needle, or if it has not penetrated the nail, then in such a case the aforementioned kind of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed in the same way as before and as I have recommended in the division
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to pierce her, then you must open the mouth of the patient and take sponge of the kind that we have mentioned with great speed following this fashion:
am subtilitat.	without causing harm.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rare and is confused and is embraced in that place, then withdraw your hand from your eye and take sponge of the kind that we have mentioned with fat or oil or salt, and pour the sponge into the other eye the next day
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And thus repeat this operation until all that is in the eye is removed, except that which may remain in the eye, for the hand must be withdrawn from the eye, for which reason you must withdraw the sponge, and care for the eye from the beginning until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And thus repeat your operation concerning that reason until it is healed
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The swelling of the tear duct, if you notice it in the eye for a long time, should be suspended on the nail; and pierce that part of it, and do not finish the incision so that no tears flow from it.</start_of_turn>
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And thus withdraw the sponge from the tear duct with oil and fat until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn>
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of certain ointments and of what is born from a wound adjusted in the eye.</start_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Certain ointments in the corners of the eye are born from a rough wound, and it is placed over the pupil, or approaches or expands over the eyelids and firmly presses the eyelids against the margins and is held together by a bandage.</start_of_turn
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	May the operation in the eye be that the patient's head be held steady in the chest; and take hold of the eye and collect all that rough matter on nails convenient with a forceps or a pair of tweezers; and pierce the wound at the beginning until everything is finished with the needle, and take care that you do not injure the eye during your operation.</start_of_turn
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be like that which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps as these which are collected together as described in this chapter.</start_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when the incision is completed and all that rough matter is removed, then fill the eye with coarse salt, or pour it in powdered form and keep it like the corrosive medicines, and rest over the eye covered with a cloth until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains any cause of eye irritation and it is very painful, and you fear excessive bleeding, then withdraw the sponge and care for the wound with oil until that bleeding ceases, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and keep the wound adjusted which occurs in this kind of case.</start_of_turn
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must always keep in mind all the cures of the eye that are natural or accidental, or with iron, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering from that operation.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of hair in the eye.</start_of_turn
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Hair so dark brown which are seen on the eye prevent the dressing from its operation, and must be removed from the eye for a certain length of days.</start_of_turn
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the hair in which the eye is dark and not another ailment is strong, and if so, then you must remove that hair.</start_of_turn
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And thus command the patient to stop their head over the belly, and suspend those veins with an ointment or two, as you deem fit; and let that ointment be of pure duplication in this fashion:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or so two ointments gradually on a body in this fashion:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And thus collect those veins with fine forceps, with subtility, and draw them out an hour at a time, until all those veins are released from their hold and become relaxed.</start_of_turn>
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Note that you should not lead the air to the extremities of the sponge; and if your operation is in the morning giving it light, and if you are firm in your operation do not injure anything except those veins.</start_of_turn>
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed your work, the hour you draw out from the belly of the patient, green or yellow, so that it may have an acrid taste that corrodes whatever is left over from the belly.</start_of_turn
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if you are not able to collect it all in that hour, then you must place all that remains with that which causes the pain, and keep them for a few days until the pain has ceased and the swelling has subsided.</start_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And thus repeat over them as the mistress of the house manages until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the manner of forceps.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of arthritis to the nose.</start_of_turn
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you have cured the arthritis with cautery or acute medicine, when it has been foretold that it is not healed, do not be zealous in it, but make an incision over the maturity of the wound, and extract all the moisture that is in it until the bone is discovered.</start_of_turn
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And thus when the bone is discovered, sometimes in corruption or blackness, the hour you burn it with a torment of this kind:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called rough head, and be made without fear, and the head be rounded thus as if pierced with a needle, in this manner (as it is in the following form).</start_of_turn
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And rest that over the corrupt part of the bone, and thus rotate that between the thighs said, and press your little hand little by little until you know that that corruption is gone.</start_of_turn
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And when anything has been extracted, then restore the limb with drying and astringent things.</start_of_turn
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the limb is consolidated and the new flesh has been born, and the limb is separated from the disease and remains for forty days, and is not renewed and is not apostematized and does not happen anything to it by chance, then you know that it is healed.</start_of_turn
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then you must not be zealous but reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: when you discover the bone again with fire or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, the hour you take three measures according to this form:</start_of_turn
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The triangular portion of the limb is extended forward towards the limb thus as sometimes it is.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And thus rest that over the bone, and that from the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little of the belly, and thus rotate your hand over the limb until you have pierced all the bone, and that you feel the patient sigh because he finds relief when you take away your hand.</start_of_turn
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore restore the limb with astringent medicines and drying things thus as you would remove a boil.</start_of_turn
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the limb are hardened, the hour that the matter which exudes from the pores returns to the nose, so that is more curious about the patient.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.</start_of_turn>
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the swelling of the belly.</start_of_turn
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the belly swells completely and does not subside at night or diminish, the hour you must loosen the patient, and keep him, and give him calm winds in the neck during the sacrifice; and rest over the belly liniment which is made of acacia and aloe and henbane and gum Arabic, and strengthen the bandage over the belly with fine powder.</start_of_turn
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powder is that you take coarse wool cloth four times folded; and make use of those cloths.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And do so gradually, as much as the necessity of the case demands.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And do so gradually, as much as the necessity of the case demands. Repeat the incisions softly and cautiously; and do not remove the humors too suddenly.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Moreover, if the ligament is softened, it must be handled with care.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And do so during the day and night as we have said
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the humor has already been reduced, well and good; otherwise, repeat the cautery over the joints and the surrounding area until it is healed
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.</start_of_turn>
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the tough membrane of the uvula.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the tough membrane of the uvula, and it is prominent and projects outside the eyelids like a grain of sand, and it is necessary to make an incision, then the operation in this case is as follows: enter the needle at the root of the uvula from the outside inwards, and then insert the needle again at the place where there is a double fold of the lacrimal membrane, and make that penetrate and withdraw the first needle according to its position; and then insert the needle into the place of the double fold and bring out the part of the uvula in the circle of the needle, and tighten that part.</start_of_turn>
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then withdraw the needle and place over the swollen area infused with fat and wait until the thread comes loose from the bone.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care of the wound so that it is comfortable when the wound is healed.</start_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes it is necessary to make an incision around the whole circumference of the tough membrane within the swollen area, and when the incision has been made with the sharp instrument that comes from the front of the wound, let out the fatty moisture, and the wound will sink down and enter as much as possible.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And tighten until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn
De curacio de alconati.	Of the treatment of gonorrhea.</start_of_turn
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called gonorrhea is not anything other than a swelling which is similar to water descending and is not like that.</start_of_turn
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Moreover, the method of working in it is that you make the disease subside over the painful area and draw out the head towards the buttocks, and when you see that the swelling has gone down to the lower parts, and that it is dry and does not descend, and that it is firm, the disease will be cured in this way as well.</start_of_turn
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down there, you know that it is water.</start_of_turn
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Moreover, if it is not prepared, the descent of the swelling with water, as we have said, then do so by making an incision over the tarsal bone at the junction of the conjunctiva and the cornea in the crown (within the area of the white of the eye), until the swelling is expelled.</start_of_turn
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it has been expelled, then you instill in the wound lukewarm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled barley and honey.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other causes until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of the water descending from the wound.</start_of_turn
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and what is convenient to perforate with a needle, and when according to the state of health.</start_of_turn
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Moreover, you must make the wound subside over the buttocks and hold the wound firmly.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And do so with your left hand over the inner eyelid if the water is in the left eye; or with your right hand if the water is in the right eye.</start_of_turn
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take a sponge, if the water is on the left; or with your left hand if the water is on the right.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And do so until the edge of the sponge reaches the base of the ray of the tear duct, and do not press too hard with the sponge on the wound.</start_of_turn
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And now pierce the belly of the patient and sit down, since it has already been affected by the cold.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And measure the distance from the navel to the pupil, which is the diameter of the eye; for you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then withdraw the abdomen into the belly, and place your hand over it again, and thus if the water descends too much, the pain which caused the patient to complain will be relieved, as soon as the water goes out of the eye which was causing the pain, and the vision returns to normal.</end_of_turn>
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And rest a little while; thus if the water has descended, withdraw that other cushion which was put under the abdomen when the water was being let out.</end_of_turn
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And thus when it is quiet and does not descend, withdraw the abdomen easily; and gently move your hand around; and dissolve in the water a little of clear salt of gem, and with that wash the eye outwards; and then remove the eye bandage or stop or dressing infused in olive oil and vinegar and water from the eye.</end_of_turn
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we must also know what is proper concerning food at this time, and keep it on the eye.</end_turn>
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not heed your abdomen when it enters the eye due to its hardness – for some men whose eyes are hard like this – then cover that you take the sponge which is called alberid, which is the shape of this:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus pierce that membrane there, do not put your hand in the wound, and do not do anything else until the abdomen has gone out from the eye safely.</end_turn
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then extract the abdomen as we have said.</end_turn>
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must praise God for his work, whether the patient is asleep or awake, who has descended fayt in which he sleeps over two cushions in a dark room, and who is prohibited from any movement.</end_turn>
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And rest in the quietness of nature so that its nature is calmed, and do not move the patient from the place where he is placed until his pain is gone.</end_turn
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the patient be bound according to his custom for the third day.</end_turn
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And thus remove that which was placed in the dark room and restore the patient's sight, and make known to him some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.</end_turn
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do anything in the time of care or at any other time.</end_turn
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You must know that you must alienate water so that it does not excite excessively for great and vehement thirst in regard.</end_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If however after this the eye is still dry, then on the seventh day remove the eye again and rectify that which is left in the water which escapes.</end_turn
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you will restore the sight of the eye and rest on the face of the patient for whom you are responsible, and let him remain there for several days, since he exists in the dark.</end_turn
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And thus gradually remove from that dark room and speak to him about his causes.</end_turn
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that it is not permitted for the pupil to remain blind for several days, and that you must be diligent in your treatment of the eye.</end_turn
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been said to us by some of those who have seen such things, and some say that there is a fire in the water of the Ayrac magdaam which is perforated by the needle through which the water escapes.</end_turn
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, we have not seen in our land anything like that which has happened in other lands; and it is possible that this is a new thing.</end_turn
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of magadans which are most appropriate for those who are ignorant of these things:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are to be performed with iron or with needles in this very triangular shape, the pointed end like that which is the shape.</end_turn
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXV.</end_turn>
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the care of animals nothing in the nose.</end_turn
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various animals in the nose which cause various causes such as a scorpion's tail of flesh or a polyp of the nose; and this disease is called polyp because it is similar to that which is represented by that tail.</end_turn
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	The color of the tumor is like that of gangrene, soft, of a yellowish-brown color; and it is not of the same color as that of a healthy lion.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those tumors that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover that the cause of the illness lies between your thighs and place it in the sun, and burn the marks of it, and prick its belly once in those tumors.</end_of_turn>
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract that to the margins of the wound, and then cauterize what you have understood from the acute heat of the one side until you believe that all the tumor has already departed; for if any cause remains from which the abscess is possible, then your remedy is to use one of the subtle instruments with which it is facilitated that no cause remains.</end_of_turn>
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if the sovereign wishes with saint or acid after the cautery, then you should stop it when you cover; or if it is from malignant tumors, then you should retract and cauterize that until it is abscised with safety and all the cavities are healed.</end_of_turn>
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And put vinegar on the nose, then the incision will be less painful and there will be water or wine.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is opened and humidity proceeds into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as much as you cover, then you know that there is no tumor in the pus surrounding the bones of the nails to which it does not reach the abscess.</end_of_turn>
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore you must enter firmly with faith in him to whom any greatness belongs, and do not touch anything, but pause between each touch the quantity of the thumb or less, and take away the disease and put a limb of the faith on the nails at the ray or for any other cause for which it is possible.</end_of_turn
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that has been done, that you take away the bad odor until it reaches the canals of the nails, and that you smear it over the greasy skin, for the troops that are observed to make the girls faint in the schools do the same thing, and it is a light cause for those who wish to do it.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then withdraw both limbs of the faith, one that goes out through the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a dose of ointment to the nails that are on the faith, and do that until you know that the tumor is already in the nails of the faith.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the faith, and pause in the nose with the abstraction of the saint a covering, and do that for three days or more until the wound is completely healed.</end_of_turn
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the case, pause in the nose a catheter of lead for five days until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you are negligent in your care, use that one.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument that captures the perfumed oil and medicines in the nails:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do that of silver or of gold, which is similar to a small lamp, with a wick, and a head that is similar to a nut.</end_of_turn
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like that of a tube, and the tube of the capturing instrument and make it flat, uncovered; to which you must put that which you will collect from the oil or from the substances that you wish from the extracts.</end_of_turn
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This is precious: a recipe of castor oil, white balayra, ginger, saffron root, long pepper, marjoram, and rue marjoram.</end_of_turn Mix with vinegar with the juice of blood and with oil, and make pills, and let one pill be dissolved in lukewarm water, and give it to the patient on the nails of the disease just as soon as possible.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxv.	The end.</start_of_turn>
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From there it is in the extremities of the nose.</start_of_turn
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The girls faint is a natural thing in the extremities of the nose, and is magnificent and commendable for five days until it is perceived otherwise.</start_of_turn
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that you must encourage that at the beginning of the appearance of the disease, and you will inherit all that.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And pause about the area or cauterize or apply a burning medicine that is in the place of it.</start_of_turn
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if it is delayed in its beginning until it is magnificent, consider if it is softened, hard, of yellowish color and little feeling, for it does not touch that which is the cause of the abscess; for girls faint at that which incites this abscess because of its great malice towards that to which it is opposed.</start_of_turn
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the afterbirth is of a tawny color and not of a dark hue, and sometimes when it begins, it is possible in every case, the doctor evacuates the bad air and instills fear in the patient, and treats the area with that which exists and restricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	From the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by a wound.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Witches that when an accident causes the solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation except for a few men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore cover, when you must deal with some cause of these, that you consider if it is a fresh plague or not, and when you have adjusted the two lips of the plague with a suture, then treat that which is within until it is healed
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and some part is healthy, then cover that you scour some part of its apparent backbone until it is healed
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two lips with a suture and strengthen those, and over those sprinkle salt and lead dust, and place over the powder a piece of thick gauze, or of some other consolidating plaster, and leave that bound for two days or three, and then remove that and change that plaster and leave that until they are healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	May the manner of the suture be that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with a thread as well as you do and make known.
Capitol .xxvii.	End of document.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of that cause which occurs in the two lips in the parts of the teeth.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Mothers who are pregnant must go to many men in the parts of their lips at their teeth some apostemas that look like grass seeds, and some of them are smaller and some are larger
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore cover that you convert the lips and wounds each one of those hard substances throughout, and over that put a poultice of lead dust until the wound is contracted, and then wash it with wine and treat the area with that which is astringent, until it is healed
Capitol .xxviii.	End of document
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the insertion of the horn adjusted in the gums
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great is the number of women who do not know how to adjust the horn which they call albulus, where cover that you suspend that on a hook or that you have those with the forceps and insert that must be their reason, and read that the blood runs or that it is healed.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And over that put some powder astringent or another adhesive or excitative powder
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that horn returns, then instill that again subsequently, and cauterize that, because that will prevent it from returning.
Capitol .xxix.	End of document
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for teeth with iron
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the parts of the teeth and of the furrow and between the gums are adjusted sharp scales, legs, and some women are of black bile and are harmful citrine or vermicular until the gum sees by that which is corrupted and is harmful to the teeth that are left.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore cover that you make the patient vomit between his teeth and stop his head in the belly, and rasp the teeth in which those scales appear to be like sand until no remains any cause, and that which is of the black bile and of the citrine and of the others that are modified
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore if that is the last of the reason that is in those of the commencement of the ratio, it is not; and if not, then you must repeat the ratio over those to the other day and the next and the next until it comes to the fourth state in that which you want it
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have needed various movements of different forms and various figures according to how it is prepared for your operation
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for so that the razor with which the tooth is shaved is another of the razor with which it is shaved between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of shaving must be prepared by you that you see
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol. Cum dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, la horas quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Capital. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</end_of_turn>
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Because when you cure the tooth from its pain in all its entirety, there is no more cause that makes the evil of its absence when it is eradicated, which is a sublimed substance that must be excused in the eradication of it.</end_of_turn>
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	May be when the disease is forceful that the tooth must be eradicated, you must declare that it is the painful tooth, because its absence removes the cause of the pain from the disease and makes it appear in the healthy tooth. Eradicate that one and then the pain ceases until the painful and diseased tooth is eradicated, for we have seen this in the operation of the barbers.</end_of_turn
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, as you must be certified what is the painful tooth, and that you know well, when you scarify in the circumference of the tooth with space around it in which there is any virtue, until it is dissolved from the root of the tooth in its entirety, and you must do so cautiously, because those who say that the tooth should be extracted at the beginning do so superficially.</end_of_turn
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And indeed, you must have something strong in your hand for good speaking or for great stupidity, and keep the head of the disease between the painful teeth that you must not touch, and gently extract the tooth according to the rule without causing greater pain to the patient.</end_of_turn
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And thus if you are not forgetful, when you have one of those instruments, put it aside from all parts with ease and make the extraction easier from the beginning.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is brittle or rotten, you must hold that fracture and strengthen that part with a thin ray to prevent it from cracking in the time of your constriction about that one that you hold.</end_of_turn
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Therefore you must work cautiously around the circumference of the gum and keep your strength that you do not break that one and leave it fractured, and return over the patient for the mischief that is greater than the first pain of the disease.</end_of_turn
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And keep in mind that you must not do what ignorant barbers do in their fisting and boldness about the eradication of their patients, for they do not administer what we have recommended. Because the veguada makes greater the great diseases that are more difficult to cure, and the reasons for their remaining are all gone, or some of them, or that they extract that one while the others remain in the mandible as we have seen in many cases.</end_of_turn
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And finally, after the eradication of the tooth, rinse the mouth with wine vinegar or wine with salt.</end_of_turn>
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if blood flows from the wound to help, just as we have seen, keep any amount of sage and sprinkle it over the wound, and if you do not provide that sage, cauterize.</end_of_turn
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and subtle nails with which it is grasped at the beginning is long handle and broad head, so that they do not bend when working.</end_of_turn
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And indeed, as sometimes with large nails when you first start using them, they are not bent, but are short handled.</end_of_turn
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are useful from India iron nails, useful for extracting teeth that are intertwined with each other and that break for strong constriction, and some of those who have seen them say that they are like the beak of a heron, that is to say, wide and strong.</end>
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the eradication of teeth and the extraction of the fractured bones of the mandibles.</end_of_turn>
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the tooth must be eradicated because it is fractured, keep the surrounding area around the wound still for a day or two until the area is softened; and in the meantime apply an emollient or dressing to the area which is like the beak of a heron called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:</end_of_turn
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The nails of those instruments are useful as well as lime or aloe.</end_of_turn
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey my order with these forceps or nails, keep in mind that you must give up the reason and uncover all the flesh and insert the instrument which has no name, so it is a small lever whose form is like this:</end_of_turn
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And be of short handle large and wide a little, and do not be afraid that it is broken.</end_of_turn
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if the reason for the pain is excessive heat, it is not good; but if so, help me with other instruments, of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular, emitted in which there is any thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a pointed extremity
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already I have helped with this instrument having two slopes of which this is the form accordingly:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and other instruments which I will enumerate in order of their teeth; for the help of this instrument which is assembled like a large bowl, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extremity either round or short, which is any thickness, and which is not flattened so as to be broken
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And so are the other instruments of the teeth more or less like the others
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	More skilled are the artificers and learned in the art, they find for themselves various means according to what they understand of the operation and the various diseases; for these diseases of which the ancients did not say or even name their own instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	More if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is fractured, or if they are loosened, then the foot should be kept carefully in that place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help me with managing this which is the form
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it is of any great or small size, and is bound or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely healed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines at that time
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More if in the bone is a little wound, then scratch that from that wound and from its blackness, and care for that until it is healed
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the care of the teeth eminent over the others
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course for those of this shape is jagged, and especially when it comes to the women, and especially to the beloved; therefore you must consider: if the tooth is not at all close to another tooth, and it is not possible to ligate or support it, then leave it as it is; but if it is not annexed to another tooth, then you should apply this instrument of which this is the form; and it is like a pig's jaw, and is made of Indian steel of extramitted not sharp.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be at the place where you are applying that in a few days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not like the others of the teeth
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian steel of which this is the form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it must be of Indian steel and the mark must be clearly seen; and it must be like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is to be filed little by little in a few days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or falls out
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And return the thread to the end, and scratch that from the corners of the wounds.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth from which a part is fractured and the tongue is led, then cover that until the expectation of that fragment is over and it is equalized, and it is to be filled so that the tongue does not burn or the word does not corrupt
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of teeth decayed with gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth before with concussion and removal by percussion or extraction, and the disease does not subside over what is eaten, and you have cured that with medicinal substances, and it has not been of any use, then so that they do not fall out is necessary to make an inlay of gold and not of silver, for silver turns green and soon becomes poor in a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the gold be of such fineness and thickness as is necessary to enter between the teeth; and the form of the restoration is that you take the gold and take twice its thickness between two healthy teeth, and that it grows between two curves of the gold between two decayed teeth, or if one or two, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth of the other side
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the thread inside the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is not decayed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your stroke be with which you strengthen the gold be over the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And immediately cut away the superfluous parts surrounding the forceps or tonsils, and add them to each part of the body, and convert them and the hidden ones between the sound tooth and the bad tooth, so that they do not cause damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And immediately remove that which extends as far as Rome.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	More if it is slipped or swollen, stretch that or those to the other side in such a way at all times
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the rectification of two sound teeth and two bad teeth, as sometimes these are bound:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or two are returned, immediately close the sockets in which they were, and let them recede as we have recommended, and that they remain closed
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not do anything but a good craftsman and a wise man.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Every ulcer is suitable for any cause of bone disease, and it is useful for them as a remedy as regards the formation of teeth, and is placed in the place where the tooth is lacking, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves in that place for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prevents that which is spoken
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is left behind the tongue has some ulcers or is natural to it which a man does not know, or accidentally caused by plague which has already hardened
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you burn the mouth of the patient, remove all that exists in the belly; and elevate the tongue, and immediately cut that ligament nerves as much as necessary until the tongue is freed from its retraction.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	More if in that there is any hardness or denudation, and that which is left for the consolidation of plague, when you have cut once you will split that for the width until you have cut through the ligament and the nodulation has been dissolved
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care that there be no excessive fissure in the preparation of the flesh and that you cut here with a pointed instrument and go away from the blood flow of the saint
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And immediately wash away the remnants of the incision with oil or wine or with cold water; and immediately stop leaving the tongue loose; so that it does not solidify with any ulcer.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	More if there is blood flow from the veins, stop over the wounded area with a soaked cloth; more if the blood boils, when you have cauterized the area with the cautery which you have previously recommended.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately take care of the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of wisdom from leaving the tongue
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some ulcers happen to leave the tongue swollen resembling a small hill which hinders the natural operation of the tongue; and when it has become inflamed it is greatly increased until the mouth is dry
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in it is that you burn the mouth of the patient sitting before the sun and consider the swelling
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if sometimes you see a yellow or black spot, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that which is rotten.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then immediately put on the thumb in it, and cut that with a sharp instrument, and cut off all of it; and if there is blood flow from the wound during the operation, immediately stop it by pressing the bleeding, so that it is not dry, until the blood has clotted
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately return to your work until you have completed it, until it has been washed with wine and salt; and take care of that which is left of the other care until it is healed
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XVI
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of the wisdom from two ears and that which is nothing in the gullet and from the other wisdoms
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it is swollen in the gullet, so are the glands which are assembled together and which are outside and are not nourished by two ears, which when you cure with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the wisdom is hard, of yellow color, with little sensation, then do not touch that which is rotten
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a brown color and the reason is large, then do not touch that which is rotten for the flow of blood; remove that which is soft, and you either extract that or it will break by itself
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is pale in color, radon, and the reason is subtle, then that is that it is likely an injury.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you consider the patient's condition, giving an account of your operation, if the swelling has subsided or diminished in any way; then do you cause the patient to cough strongly, turn their head to the side, and open their mouth, while the attendants grasp between their thighs according to the patient's tongue, leaving an instrument of noble kind in their hand.</end_of_turn>
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	Whether of silver or gold, and subtle as a coat.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Thus, when you promise this to the patient and show them the swelling, and touch that which is in the abdomen, then take hold once and leave the other in its place, and pull the other outwards as much as you can.</end_of_turn
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other thing that you pull is any cause of the tunics, and in this way you apply that instrument of which I have spoken.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is joined like forceps, however the extremities of it are bent, so that the orifice of each one is at the end of the other, not acute, which is of iron without a bevel.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	Or if this instrument is not at hand, then apply that which is like a sponge: and be acute from one side, not from the other side.</end_of_turn>
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having incised one wound, then the other is to be incised in the same manner as the first wound, and then keep the wound closed with water from a jug.</end_of_turn
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Or if there flows forth pus, keep water of decoction of poppy seed or of chamomile flower and remain as I have said of the causes mentioned above until the flow of the pus is restrained, and take care of that which remains until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And many herbs grow in the ground, other swellings, others two carbuncles, and these are to be incised as I have said above concerning the incision of two wounds together.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with swelling in the groin who was lying in the ground of the field, who had swelling which tended towards a dark color, little sensation, which already closed the field of the groin, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and had been forbidden food and drink of water, and was on the verge of death if more days had passed for a day or two.</end_of_turn>
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The swelling had already become so great that there were two fist-sized holes between which the surgeon had to pass two fingers.</end_of_turn
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I must cut fistulately and remain with one of them once, and pull out the other, and when it is pulled out, I take away from it a great part, and I apply that which I have mentioned concerning the incision of the other hole, and I open the mouth of it, and I compress its tongue, and I remain with the finger in the wound.</end_of_turn
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And I take away a great part of it, and there runs from it only a little pus.</end_of_turn
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the groin of that woman is absolutely saved, and she begins to drink water so soon, and I do not cease to incised that swelling until much time has passed, and there follows swelling in its place, which I must also incised as long as that lasts.</end_of_turn
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I went and cauterized the groin of her, so as to avoid infection; and I remained there and did not depart until I had beheld that from God.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The end of the text.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the incision of the heel when it is swollen.</end_of_turn>
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the heel becomes soft and is swollen and is long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the outer part large and round, and then it is called bubble.</end_of_turn
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Or when it is cured with the water that we have said in the division, and you do not neglect your care, sometimes the swelling will go away and be subtle, when the time has come; and if it is at that length, and there is blood, of a yellow or black color, and it is not to its centimeter, then you must fear the incision, for in that case there is fear of the patient.</end_of_turn
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its paleness and length, that you must make the patient cough and praise the tongue with the instrument of which we have spoken concerning its shape, and you remain with the finger in the wound and pull out the other.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And know that you should only insert that which is adjusted according to the natural tendency of the limb, for if you insert too much, you will cause them to swell.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if you insert, use of that which we have recommended in the incision of two incisions, and take care that it is sound.</end_of_turn>
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	More if the ailment is spread by the incision, cover that you use an engine in the cautery of it for fear, and the manner of handling the cautery is nothing but acute water, and it is that you hold the patient's head still, and immediately take hold of the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned, and immediately pour water that we have mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and comfort her with that cause life, and stop that from spreading or becoming soft, and from that fill the cavity of the instrument which is like this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Or the evacuation of the cavity in which the medicine has been placed just like the cavity of a bowl of ray, and hold the instrument with the medicine on the lip, and the patient will spit over the side of the lip so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that for the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not remain from that cause any cause on the palate of him and that he evacuate that.</end_of_turn>
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And immediately put your hand on the medicine, and press that against the uvula for a space of a minute until it has become softened and calmed by the bite of the medicine.</end_of_turn>
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a sponge and cover that over the limb of the ray, and immerse the sponge in the medicine, and put the ray on the sponge in a tube so that the sponge adheres to that tube, and do that for as long as you wish until you achieve what you desire from the cautery of the toe, and immediately stop that so that it dries up and falls off within three days or four.</end_of_turn>
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the medicine should be repeated, repeat that, and immediately stop the cautery from spreading in the circuit of the toe at the base of the nail, and modify that which is in the circuit of the medicine, and let it be washed with fresh water, and let it be cured with ointment, and let him rest until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is more saving than incision and more lasting for fear.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some women are cured of the ulcer with that which is more subtle than cautery and incision, which is cured by fumigation in this manner: prescribe calamine, rue, origium, ruda, bitter almonds, chamomile, broth and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, in a wave, and let them be submerged in strong vinegar, and bubble; and the wave be given to her to drink adequately, and in the middle of the wave put a bandage, over which is placed an instrument of copper according to this manner; let it be made of silver or copper.</end_of_turn
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let her put her limb into the mouth of the patient until the vapor makes the uvula rest on the canula, until the uvula is not opaque.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And immediately repeat that until it is dry, and take care that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an attack, because it would be too strong for the attack, and do not say that you are performing it, but declare that it is the cautery.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	More if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a tube and apply to the limb of the ray a piece of sponge, so that the mouth of the patient is cleaned, because the sponge of the sponge prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.</end_of_turn
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.</end_of_turn>
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extractions of splinters and that which adheres to the palate and the other causes.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	A splinter or any other cause adheres to the palate or nail of the foot or any other cause.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then cover that you extract that which is apparent, on which you cast your gaze, for because you touch the tongue with the instrument that has a sole, so that you are told that that which is in the throat.</end_of_turn
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the throat, cover that you make the patient vomit the patient before the food is digested in the stomach, for that strengthens the cause that is annexed to the throat if it is forced out by vomiting; or that he swallow the patient one spoonful of honey or radish or a piece of bread soaked in vinegar; or give him to drink one spoonful of sea sponge soaked in oil and bind that firmly with faith, and immediately give the patient that, for when it gets to the place where the thorns are and is extracted, the patient will have forgotten it.</end_of_turn
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If these causes have not been forgotten, then use a lead instrument in this way: ...
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Make it thicker than a small ray, and in the extraction of it there should be a concavity which you will put into its groove easily
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And elevate the heel of the patient slightly, and keep your hand from the heel of the limb to the groin, so that it does not touch the intestines or the bone, or that the hand of the physician should be on the chest.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, when the patient is in pain, for his knowledge of the place of the underlying cause and the pain that is in it, and pulls his hand towards the instrument in his hand, as much as he is prepared to do so until it is forgotten
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.</start_of_turn>
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of a blood vessel that is attached to the groin.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood vessel has been treated with what has been said in the division of the cure with medicines and has not been relieved, consider the time of the patient in the groin towards the sun, because you have compressed the tongue of the patient with the instrument that we have recommended
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if the blood vessel has sometimes burst, extract that one little or slightly bent downwards adequately.</start_of_turn>
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, take a curved needle and insert it into the groin of the patient, and when you have placed it in the cavity of the needle put a burning iron on the concavity of the needle, and do this for as long as the blood vessel is dead and is not hindering the groin.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And keep a vessel filled with cold water nearby, and open its mouth in that place, and wash the mouth with that; and do not do anything else with that, but keep the water there for an hour or two with your hand, until the blood vessel has recovered as much as the water has cooled down.</start_of_turn>
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However, if it is not forgotten as we have recommended, keep the patient calm by hand or by means of an instrument that we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it will fall.</start_of_turn
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	This is another way of operating in the fumigation of that, that you take a bowl in which there are burning coals and cover the bowl with a cover, and there is a hole in the middle of the cover, and put the extremity of the instrument in that hole; and when the smoke has gone down, open the patient’s mouth at the extremity of the needle, and close the patient’s mouth so that the smoke is not blown out until you know that the smoke has reached the blood vessel, because the blood vessel must have fallen down.</start_of_turn
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and give them salty foods and drinks, and do not give them water, and if necessary, take them away from this regimen.</start_of_turn
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument with which the blood vessel of the groin is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps in this way, but it is in any curvature: ...
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	...which is similar to the groin, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a heron, which is hooked, in which it is grasped from five, so that when any cause is compressed, that does not slip away.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.</start_of_turn
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the word in the opening of the abscesses and in the section of their.</start_of_turn
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are of various kinds, of various methods, as you remember from this book.</start_of_turn
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are various in perforation and section of them by two methods, of which one is for the species of abscesses in themselves; and for what compresses of the humors.</start_of_turn
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where the accidents of the body occur, for the abscess that happens in the head is different from the abscess that happens in the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy part happens differently from the abscess that happens in the joint; and each one of them must be treated differently.</start_of_turn
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	The wound should not be pierced except in the mature parts of the limb or as a consequence of it.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other wounds which are crossed should be cut when mature, not according to their size, just like those which are proper for the joints, for an apostema which appears in a joint remains there until it is forced out; and if it is too strong, it corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, because it is a cause of contraction of that limb; or if the apostema is that of a principal limb, and you delay the perforation of it until it is mature, it does not harm the principal limb; or if it is that of the heel, therefore perforate only when it is not mature; and do not perforate carelessly, except for the one which is proper for the heel, in order that you do not weaken the heel and that it is elongated towards the base of the heel, and that there is a fistula, or that it is healed in the end without being healthy.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is better that you know the time of perforation of the apostema, and that is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You know that it is mature when the pain and fever cease, and also the diminishing of redness and pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the apostema, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that the perforation must be made in the place where the apostema comes out and where its neck comes from.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	The perforation should always be done along the length of the limb or the body, if the aposmata is in the parts of the feet or the legs, and in the place of the lacertices, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and finally in all the places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use perforation according to that limb.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the aposmata is in a fleshy place, it is more convenient to delay the perforation until the digestion of the limb has been confirmed according to custom, as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, it prolongs the pain of the limb and its swelling, and it makes the lips of the limb stiff and deep
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Other aposmata must be pierced according to the width of the limb or of the body as necessity requires, or as the limb itself demands.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must give a small perforation, and in large aposmata give great perforation or several sections according to the variety of the size of the aposmata.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other aposmata where the cord is concave and inflamed, when it is necessary because it is painful like bread and painful in the end that it should stay, just like that which happens in the groin of the buttocks and the armpits
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And in those which are inscribed with three angles; and in those which are inscribed like the figure of a mirta leaf, like the aposmata of the ankle bones
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And in those which are administered round section and lunar section, and which resemble these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And in those which are not capable of such things like external aposmata, you must pierce only the superficial perforation, or only the flat one alone
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the aposmata is large and has already collected much pus, that you pierce it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that moment; having extracted a part of it, immediately put the aposmata back into its place the next day, and the next day extract a greater part, and do this gradually until it is healed
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And more if the illness is of cold origin, or of hot and cold, or a young child, or an old man in decrepitude, for the vital heat is resolved by the evacuation of the pus, and thus the illness is cured, and you must operate quickly.</end_of_turn>
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter with great care, and take great care with your perforation in which you pierce these aposmata, because you must remove the humors and consider therefore if the humors of the aposmata are few or are flat, when you administer the which ones or the amount of them; and if the aposmata is large, and the tears of the perforation are many, you must pause for a moment until they settle down.</end_of_turn>
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the aposmata a part of the cord is detached or that you have concaved in the circuit, you must complex it with cloth or thread of silk, just like when you have treated bones or cartilage, its humidity; and strengthen that within the third day; and immediately after process that and care for it until the inflammation has disappeared.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if blood flows out in the hour of your operation, immediately administer cold water and vinegar in which you have soaked a piece of cloth, and stop that over the area of the flow of blood until the bleeding has stopped.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May it be so that the flow of the sacred things persevere, for it is necessary that you administer regiment and care, and powders as I have recommended in many places of this present book and of division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is wintertime, and the seat of the apostem is of nerves, then you must instill powders in wine and oil, and leave them on the area.</end_of_turn>
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer, and the parts are fleshy, then you must leave powders in vinegar with oil or in wine and oil, and do so until the third day, as we have said, and you must remove the apostem and evacuate it, and administer to it the cure that is necessary for it until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of apostemas universally, more so according to the way of distinction that I have already said of every apostem in what manner it is a way of the care of it by chapters singly.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xli.	Chapter LXI.</end_of_turn>
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of apostemas which are in the codena of the head.</end_of_turn
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the small head there are small apostemas, and so of species of knots which contain tunics that are made for them; and the species of these are soft.</end_of_turn
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of these there are bubbles, and of those there are those that contain humidity similar to lime.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those there are those that contain humidity similar to urine, and resembling them; and of those that are waxy.</end_of_turn
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these, there is no fear, as you must know the extension of these does not do harm to the arteries.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of these is that you remove them with an instrument of the kind that you see, which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.</end_of_turn
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what is contained is humidity, then you must cut that apart by section according to the length by superficial section according to this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line of B, entering into the line of G. For when the humidity is evacuated, then you must scrape that from which that humidity was contained, and do not leave from that any cause of all, for the troops that were fleeing return if they remain from that cause.</end_of_turn
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then you will immerse the wound in Egyptian unguents, if present, or in water and salt; and fill that with that the wound and leave that until the next day, for that which is eaten away corrodes all that remains of that membrane.</end_of_turn
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then you will repeat over that wound with Egyptian unguents according to the third and fourth if you command it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that membrane; when the wound is cured with the unguents until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the apostem contains fat nodes, then you must puncture that in this manner:</end_of_turn
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and take nails between two lips of the section and run that from end to end, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic that contains that.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	However if your artery does you harm, then you must tell me that at once.</end_of_turn
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly you will do in the greasy apostem of section and care as we have said; and the section of the greasy apostem is less painful, for it is of little blood and little humidity.</end_of_turn
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And many of these apostemas that are in the head in many homes with those whom there is no humidity; for the cause is that I do not know of an apostem in the head of an old woman who has not been bled, and I have seen that when it has been perforated, the apostem turns out like a white deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be drunk, and if any of you should wish to perforate that, you will cure that.</end_of_turn
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	However in other apostemas that happen in the head, another thing is not this chapter, namely as regards the apostemas that happen at the heads of children, you must take the reasons for the hangovers, however the section of these is superficial.</end_of_turn
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the body of the illness is relieved in the lower parts.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then care for those with what is necessary for their care.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Section of scrophulas which happen in the groin.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These veins are thickened in this area around the groin and in the buttocks and in the armpits; and some of them are thickened in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And so those which happen in the groin, and those which are formed between them, and all the scrofula of these is without its own tunic, just like in the nodes and abscess of the head, just as we have recounted
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are veins, which some of them are small stones, and some of them which contain moisture, and some of them are malignant which do not obey treatment
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that place where you have a good opportunity in the touch, when the color of that which is manifested is proper to the color of codena, and it is bad for all, and it is not annexed to the nerves of the groin, neither to the veins, neither to the arteries, and it is not a swelling, because you should prick that which is just under the surface of the part from the part beyond the body from the line of G up to the line of B, and scrape that from all over, and stretch two lips of the codena towards both ends, or towards the nails if you need them, just as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious not to prick the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the sponge should not be too acute, that you do not damage your hand with the incision, or that you irritate the patient, and that you do not prick anything that is not necessary to prick; for if you prick the vein or artery you will prevent your operation, for the hours you stop the bleeding of the wound will be more plentiful of blood clots, and open the wound, and leave that which has stopped bleeding until the pain of the abscess has disappeared and the wound has become softer and the swelling has gone down.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood clot has been evacuated.<end_turn>
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation when you have finished.<end_turn>
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And in this way inquire whether there is any other small abscess, so prick them and wash them out.<end_turn
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large vein, cover that the hours you do not prick that abscess from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Always cover that with a faithful fold and that you leave that until it falls down by itself spontaneously.<end_turn>
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And immediately fill the wound with old linen which you have already soaked in Egyptian balsam, and care for that.<end_turn>
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you prick that abscess entirely, the hours cover that you adjust the two lips of the wound and compress so much pus that no blood remains superfluous.<end_turn>
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	More if there is still some surplus of blood due to the greatness of the abscess, cover that you understand how to prick the root of that, and remove that and administer suture and what is said.<end_turn
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the abscesses which contain moisture, prick that with a superficial perforation here where you see the maturity of them, and stop perforating from that which is below the belly, just as we have said.<end_turn><end_turn>
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And immediately administer perforation, lukewarm in the water and similar to those, to prevent that which is remaining from the corruption.<end_turn><end_turn>
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the wound has already become soft, the hours you care for that which is generated in the water until it is healed.<end_turn><end_turn
Capitol .xliii.	Section .xliii.<end_turn>
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the heel of the abscess which is without its own sac.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Say that the ancient doctors did this incision in the heel, and I do not know any man in our land who has ever had success with it.<end_turn><end_turn
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of that sermon of them.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More in the women there is no slipping away, cover that the extraction of the heel is avoided, as for that it is not of any use for so much as all the veins and the major arteries of the patient are here.<end_turn><end_turn
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More in those who have abscesses in the mouth or heel or two anklebones, when the disease is not in the bone, cover using the incision of the heel to escape the loss which is useful for perforation.<end_turn><end_turn
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore cover when you wish, that the wound bursts open and leaves three circles of the circles of the wound, or four at most for the width in that which there are two circles for quantity, that the section be in cartilage, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for section, for it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of sanctity are loosened from it.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is cautious, cover when that the heel of the heel bone extends towards the ankle, and then cut the heel bone until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sanctity if you see any of these for any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then puncture according to what we have recommended; and it is significant to section the canal by the flame which is from that which arises from that which is broken and for the evacuation of the clot.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour is ripe in which perforation is feared, add two layers of fat to the heel of the wound, and when only that remains of the cartilage
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh vanish until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And thus Albucasis says that the sum of the words we have recommended is not simply that you see that from these boils already postmortem the heel of the patient has become soft, and that the patient is dead, and that from him the flesh is separated, and these go to infect the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the wound every time he breathes, and is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And thus I command that the wound be left open until the malice of the disease has passed; and the malice of it is for three days; and therefore I command that the wound be closed when it is healed.</start_of_turn>
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen for my own business is that a servant brought a bowl and poured some medicine into the heel of the patient's foot and punctured in that place a part of the bone of the heel, and I was called to care for it, and I covered the wound with ointment just as it is done for a corpse, and I uncovered the wound and covered the flesh with the ointment which was on the wound itself little by little.</start_of_turn>
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	And thus I confessed that I had not pierced any veins or guided the needle, and that I had simply drained the wound, and cured that until it was healed.</start_of_turn
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not blame the servant if she did not understand, and I immediately returned to my duties.</start_of_turn
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the heel there is no fear.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLV.</start_of_turn>
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of section concerning the postmortem swelling which happens in the heel outside, and it is called hernia of the heel.</start_of_turn
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This large swelling which is called hernia of the heel is large according to the colour of the body, and is not in the legs.</start_of_turn
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two methods, either it is natural or accidental.</start_of_turn
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one it is not a matter of cure.</start_of_turn
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two methods of which one is like grass knots, and the other method is like a swelling which is caused by the bursting of an artery, and in that one there is fear.</start_of_turn
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not cover that which makes presumption like iron except in the case that it is small.</start_of_turn
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should know that if you find it like grass knots, and it is not suspended from any vein, then you should puncture that just as if it were a node, and extract that which is contained in the skin and the membrane; and if not, the whole limb should be investigated to find the cause of the pain, and to provide proper care until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.</start_of_turn
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the different kinds of knots.</start_of_turn
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the knots there are many kinds, and I have already mentioned all the kinds in the division.</start_of_turn
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And I cover that I recommend the difference between a node and an extrusion so that there is no doubt.</start_of_turn
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an extrusion is a fever and heat and severe pain until the swelling of the fluid subsides; and it is completed by decomposition when the time comes that the fever, the pain and the heat cease.</start_of_turn
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	The warmth of the node is neither heat nor cold nor pain, and it contains that yellow sac which is at the root of the disease.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	It is according to the nature of the body, and its commencement is like cheese and is made like wax, whether greater or lesser, and they are of two kinds, either oily and containing moisture, or dry and containing fat, and the colors of moisture are muddy, as I have said in the division.</end_of_turn>
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of the node, that you expel that which is called intumescence, according to its commencement which is at the root of the discomfort, as it will appear in the head which is nearby.</end_of_turn
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	It is a way of examining tumors and all nodes, that you take hold of this discomfort and bring that into the most humid place that you find in the tumor, and you will withdraw the fingers until you realize that the discomfort has already penetrated the cavity.</end_of_turn>
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally put your hand according to the measure of the size of the tumor, and extract the tumor and consider what is left of it.</end_of_turn
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture, whatever its color, has been discharged, then you will apply incision to the surface according to what I have said concerning other tumors.</end_of_turn
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture remaining from the intumescence, then you will know that it is fat.</end_of_turn>
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it over them with a blade having the shape of a cross according to this shape:</start_turn
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	thus as I have taught you, and suspend that which is on nails, and scour the cavity thoroughly, and keep the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that marrow from the node.</start_turn>
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	However, if it is fractured in the operation, it is not possible to extract that marrow, and muddy spots are seen therein, and you will extract it piece by piece until no cause remains.</start_turn
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, little or much, the node returns according to the most.</start_turn
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes some small part remains, then complete the wound with several sharp corrosive powders and stretch the wound, and rest over that which is the tumor caut, and care for the other treatment until it is healed.</start_turn
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the node is large, then you will compress the two lips of the wound and care for that which is inside.</start_turn
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	However, if the pulse is contrary to it, or is not pulsating, then you will cover it and keep the place of the wound scraped with oil that is old and greasy for two days or for three until the wound has healed and the swelling has subsided; and finally you will return to cutting away whatever remains of the node.</start_turn
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLV.</start_turn>
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the necessary discomfort in incision and perforation.</start_turn
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those three kinds are the forms of the tumors, and of them some are great, and of them some are medium, and of them some are small.</start_turn
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the great tumor is like this:</start_turn
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium tumor is like this:</start_turn
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small tumor is like this:</start_turn
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are useful for iron, for alum, for fallen extremities suitably, so that they bind the intrament in the tumors.</start_turn
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experts, and are known as barbers, and one of them is called barber.</start_turn
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of three kinds, of which one is great, one is medium, and one is small.</start_turn
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great expert, form of him:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium expert, form of him
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small expert, form of him.</start_turn
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	I believe that these are for those tumors and exits and fistulas and abscesses so that between those there are bones and other causes.</start_turn
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And so round, round, lions, like great needles with which the threads are sewn, and they are useful for alum, or for lead or iron, or silver, And the more they are of alum, the better.</start_turn
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccions.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds, of which some are long, others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the fistula and the stricture of the same
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Like the great experience of the black plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Like the middle experience of the black plum
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Like the small experience of the black plum
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of nails are of three kinds, of which some are simple, having only a curvature, and others have three shapes: large, few, and middle
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their nails are broken, and there are three kinds
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these, some have two curvatures, and there are three kinds
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these, some have three curvatures, and there are three kinds
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these things are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a large simple nail, the shape of it is like this
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of a middle simple nail
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small simple nail, the shape of it is like this
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of a broken nail of a large size
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a broken nail of a middle size, the shape of it is like this
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a broken nail of a small size, the shape of it is like this
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a large nail that has two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The shape of a middle nail that has two curvatures
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a small nail that has two curvatures
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a large nail that has three curvatures
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a middle nail that has three curvatures
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a small nail that has three curvatures
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scorched, and there are three kinds, of which one is large, the other middle, and the other small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The shape of a large scalpel
Forma del scapel migier:	The shape of a middle scalpel
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of a small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The limbs of those on which the incision is made are acute, and the others are not acute, and are not interrupted in such a way, but rather because it is useful to assist in the excision of the nodes, for fear of injuring a vein or nerve, and for those it is healthy to the patient and provides tranquility in the reduction of the swelling which accompanies the excision of the abscess
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of helms, and there are three kinds: large, middle, and small, just like veyras.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large helm
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of a middle helm
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of a small helm
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are useful for ears and resemble a ray on which there is an alcove.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the limb with the pierced point with hidden sponge and in that which runs to the parts downwards and upwards, when you wish, just like those you see
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers of the hand must pierce the abscesses without causing harm, and there are three kinds: large, middle, and small
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those things:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of winds with which the flow of blood is closed, and there are three kinds; large, middle, and small; the shapes of them are like this
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are useful for ears, circular with some length, and are subtle
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And cover that these three kinds of winds must be used because they stop the flow of blood with speed, and in the beginning it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	In no case must you apply these [cautery points] to all parts of the body, but only in fleshy places, thus as in the incisions of the thighs and buttocks, and in the incisions of the bones, nipples, belly, and genitals, resembling those in fleshy incisions huminous.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Many remedies are made from these small instruments resembling fish scales according to this fashion; for which the flesh is cut when it is deemed to be caused by inflammation, or incision of a vein or artery.</end_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And these remedies are made round in this fashion:</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlvii.	(The provided text does not include the translation of the remaining portion of the medical treatise.)</end_of_turn>
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Concerning the care of the breasts of men which are composed of women.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some remedies swell the breasts of young men who have begun to grow, and when these swell the breasts, they become assembled like those of women, and remain so swollen afterwards, leaving them limp.</end_of_turn
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who is suffering from this, command that he be incised with a crescent-shaped incision from the line of B to the line of G, and immediately excise the whole abscess, and place the plague of medicine intended, and adjust the two lips of the incision so that they lie close together, and care for the inside so that it becomes healthy.</end_of_turn
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	More so if the breast hangs downwards towards the lower parts and is softened by its magnitude as it happens with women, when it should be divided into two lateral sections as wide as necessary, at two lunar-shaped incisions, of which each contains the other at the end of each, until the greater line contains the smaller according to this fashion from the line of B to the line of G. And immediately excise the cord that is between the two lips of the plague, and stay the swelling, and administer what has been said about the suture and the patches that are necessary for the cure until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not comply with the incision of that which you must make for the discomfort of the patient, and for the discharge of the abscess, then command that you drain the plague by submerging it in corrosive ointment and leave that which is left until the ointment has eaten away the fat, and care for that which is left until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlviii.	End of Document</end_of_turn>
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses that come from behind and irritate.</end_of_turn
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from behind and irritate are of the species of scrofulas, tough, which contain a sac.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those there are some which contain moisture; and those which contain moisture must be incised with a crescent-shaped incision according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when everything has been evacuated from the abscess of the boil, then command that you close the wound with old cloth and leave it until the next day.</end_of_turn
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And care for the wound both before and after with convenient ointment until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes, and of the scrophulas, then you must cut open that as we have said in the section about the scrophulas altogether.</end_of_turn
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is widespread in this way that it will not suffice to drain it, then command that you cauterize it according to what has been said above.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xlix.	End of Document</end_of_turn
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of abscesses which occur by artery or vein.</end_of_turn
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the cord which is above that is solidified, which is the cause of the abscess, it is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by the artery or vein: for when the abscess is caused by an artery, it is long aggregated in the belly of the body; and when it is caused by a vein, sit on it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is caused by a vein is round as the body manifests.</end_of_turn
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision of this abscess is wrong, especially in those who leave the heels, and the buttocks, and the groin, and in many parts of the body; and it is not great, therefore command that its cure by iron be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, be avoided.</end_of_turn
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More so if it is of the latter kind, cut into the cord section in the long; and immediately ligate the section with a clamp and hold the artery, and drain the tunicas until it is uncovered.</end_of_turn
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And so do I place upon that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and I establish the thread firmly doubled in two places, — which causes your eye to see clearly in extracting two threads which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And so do I puncture the place which is between two ligaments at the edge of the wound that has escaped all that is in it, and I dissolve the clot.</end_of_turn>
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And so do I give care in which is engendered poor blood until the ligaments fall; and I care for that which burns conveniently as much as until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is a clot due to a vein being cut, then you must keep your hand there where the clot is at the root, and then insert the needle where you have left your hand, and make it penetrate; and double the thread in such a way that you can extract that which is in the other side, and then ligate the clot as much as necessary according to what I have told you about the ligate of the grape of two parts from two extremities of the thread.</end_of_turn>
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Or if you fear that the thread will be torn, then insert the thread firmly with that needle leaving all the clot until the incision of the first needle, and strengthen the threads in four places.</end_of_turn
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the clot in the middle of its place where it is when it is finished, and when it is dry, you will make an incision of the excess of the wound, and leave what is bound.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And so do I place upon it the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and I give the care which is useful with warm compresses and heat until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the treatment of a clot caused by the twisting of nerves.</end_of_turn>
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Likewise, when a clot occurs in an artery or a vein, and in the same way a clot occurs in nerves when it is affected by percussion or excessive work, and for the like.</end_of_turn
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is more useful in the places of the assistants or the thigh, or in any place where stiffness of the joints is suspected.</end_of_turn
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And the clot is difficult, and is like that of the other body, and is in the greatest part of its disposal when it is stretched violently, sitting in it the patient appears stunned.</end_of_turn
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a clot that is added to the root of the body, and for so do you leave the wound open, and it is more painful throughout and does not go to the upper or lower parts.</end_of_turn
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore in those which are in the joints it does not suffice to apply iron, because great force must be exerted against contraction.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And that which is in the head or in the front of the wound at the edge.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	And if it is a little clot, then you must bind it and remove that which is unnecessary.</end_of_turn
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then you must suspend it with a bandage, and extract that, and then keep that; and close the wound with sutures, and care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .li.	Chapter end.</end_of_turn>
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the cutting of a clot that occurs from the heel that occurs in the belly.</end_of_turn
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Until to the buttocks of those who are seated among those who are watching from the belly of those who are present who are infected with fungal diseases similar to those of the fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of which is large; and already the lips of those are soft, and it is of those that is small, and is not majestic.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in the belly of it were two companions who were more like fungi resembling each other, and there was no difference between the white ones, of small root.</end_of_turn
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were ulcerated and bled, and moisture ran from it all the time.</end_of_turn
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I recommend that you apply it on one side of the foot where the pain is.</end_of_turn and the other side of the foot where there is pain.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider if the patient is sweating, and if the color of the patient’s nails is white, sweating, of subtle root; then you must puncture the side of the foot with the needle, and if in your presence there is a cautery in the fire, that the spotted matter must be expelled without causing harm; and if you see that the patient is sweating, burn that.</end_of_turn
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If sometimes the patient is pale and fearful, keep him calm by reminding him that the recent pain has passed and that the ailment is not serious; the manner of which is that which we have mentioned; and let him rest for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And so adjust the tension of the flesh of the palm; therefore, do not cease to press the great toe until it is split and falls off by itself when the work is done
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if it is of great reason, the hour at the beginning of the illness is a cause of fear and anxiety, especially in those who are in the belly
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Perhaps you will split the mass of the foot, and then cauterize that so that it does not return
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And so care for that until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And keep in mind that you do not presume to split that which is of fatty color, of little sensation, with regard to the leg, because that which is abscess is rotten.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I remind you of the wound nearby.
Capitol .lii.	End of document.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Praise be to the care of the Most High of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The navel is useful for many causes; or for fractures of the ribs which are above the belly, and yeys of them the cloth or the intestine according as it happens in other ruptures; or for healing which flows from veins or arteries as it is said above, or for cramps caused by excessive wind in the belly.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	And if it is for a fracture of the ribs and for yanking of the cloth, the hour the color of the urine is similar to the color of the body; and is like a lion when it is in pain, and appears in various positions
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the escape of the intestine, the hour its situation is that which we have recounted, of may be of various kinds, and as you have said that which is hidden from us is occultated, and so return; and it is strong in that place, and is increased by many blows of the hand and violent work
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it is for moisture, the hour is like a lion and is not occultated when we put our hand on it, nor is it constricted, nor is it painful.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for healing, the hour this symptom disappears the urine appears dark and declining
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is for meat nothing, the hour is dark urine, thick and harsh, and remains according to a quantity
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is for wind, the hour it touches them is like a lion
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in them is that you consider the hour if the navel is for the healing of an artery or a vein or for wind; the hour forbids you to take care of it, because in that case there is fear and anxiety just as we have taught you in the chapter where we said that the urine is for an artery and a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the navel is for the intestine or for the cloth, the hour commands the patient who has the pain to sit still and be relaxed; and command him to lie down on the navel; and command him to put two hands over the patient’s legs and two hands over the patient’s chest; and command him to extend the palm of the hand over the place where you have marked with your finger; and command him to grasp the great toe firmly or weakly and with a gentle touch
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And so hold the heel of the palm extended over the ligament and insert the tip of the finger into that place and ask for the intestine; and if you have found it neither grasped nor preserved for the ligament, the hour you will extract the intestine and expel the intestine to the parts under the belly
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the cloth, the hour take that one with your hand; and cut away the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, the hour surrounds that thing, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong fields and insert two needles into the circuit which you have made around the urine in the manner of a cross, which you will pierce; and then strengthen the urine in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, keep the needles and rest the place until the meat extends and falls off by itself; or cut that when it is subtle and it falls down, and so care for that which covers the wounds until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the navel is for meat nothing in it or for moisture, the hour commands you to uncover the urine just as we have said and extract the meat or the moisture which you find in it, and so care for that which covers and consolidates the place.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	Capital letter LIII.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, concerning the species of cramps and how they are to be treated with medicines, and that it is dangerous to treat them with iron so that they are not ulcerated; and we have said that cramps are caused by excess and the care of their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the old people say that some cramps can be cured only in their place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus as for cramps which are in the armpits or in the groin and similar to those which are in the limbs, it is better to remove all of them, especially when they are beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	More when it is ancient and is strong, do not dare to touch it, for I do not know that I can heal either this or any other, or that it has ever been healed by anyone.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it is when it is necessary, as we have said, that you precede the patient and evacuate from the black bile several herbs, and then anoint that area, if it is found to be painful, with ointment.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient for the operation in the preparation in which it is located, and prohibit in the tract a few nails which cover that; and press all around the abdomen so that no cause of the cause of the cramps remains
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not tear away that which is urgently, express the boils, and wipe off the blood with your hand or with an instrument.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	More if at your hand should arise contrary to great bleeding from a vein or from an artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood is stopped, and then care for that as for the other care until it is healed
Capitol .liv.	Capital letter LIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	From the care of hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned, in the division, concerning the species of hydrophobia of water, and we have told you of the care of each of them with medicines
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of timpanists or to the species of yposarcha, for that is deadly
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of hydrophobia of the timpanist with medicines and you do not perceive your medicine, then consider that if the patient has already achieved abstinence, or is suffering from another disease, just as if it were in his throat or in his belly and resembling those, do not give him iron, for fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	More if sometimes the patient vomits excessively, and it is only hydrophobia alone, and not a child or an old man, then the manner of the operation for it is that you place the patient between your thighs, and express his belly with your hand, fill the water to the part beyond the fifth, and take sponge thorns in this way:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	both in two sharp parts long, with the sharp end towards the sponge; more however even if in the course of the operation some should pass into the intestine, you must lead that away.</start_turn>
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of hydrophobia is from the bowels, for in that case you must with the incision remove three inches from the belly below the navel
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	More if the generation of hydrophobia is from disease of the spleen, then your incision must be to the left of the navel for three inches.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is from the liver, then your incision is in the flanks
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not let your incision be over the side on which the patient wants to vomit, for it will cause the blood to flow there carelessly.</start_turn
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And pierce with the instrument all the way through the belly, and enter in that incision, and raise your hand with the sponge between the belly and the skin, and you will expel that; and if the amount of an inch or two.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And pierce the spleen until the sponge reaches the place where the water is.</start_turn
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And extract that and insert an instrument of this kind:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or of ivory or of lead, to which there is a small hole at the lower end, and on the sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is blunt according to the manner of a feather, as sometimes.</start_turn
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol .lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Keep this in mind during your surgery, for blood clots can occur during the procedure; pause the operation when you see them separating the blood vessels, and care for the wound until it has healed.
Capitol .lvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn>
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	If there is swelling in the scrotum at the root of the testicles, varicocele, hernia and adhesion of the testicles to the root of the scrotum.</start_of_turn
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	These veins that are causing the swelling in the scrotum are a sign of impending rupture of the testicles.</start_of_turn
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	One of them is malignant and the other is not.</start_of_turn
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, for if you suspend it with a clamp and remove it when the swelling has gone down; and place another over that part that is submerged in Egyptian unguent; and do so until that also is cured.</start_of_turn
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the swelling is malignant, dark in color, then you must administer cautery immediately at the root of the testicles and in the proportion of the testicles.</start_of_turn
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the swelling is in the prepuce at the root of the testicles, not circumcised, and half of the swelling is inside the prepuce and the other half is outside, then you must keep the swelling which is inside until it is solidified; and when you have cured that which is outside, for when you have cured that the prepuce will not be torn.</start_of_turn
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And already there are seen to occur swellings in the groin and in the prepuce, black and rough, where you must conquer all that is already blackened and that is about to burst or that is already burst; and for this you must apply oil over that which is soft, which is composed of millet flour and poppy seeds and lead.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And care for that until the other cure is finished so that it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is blood flow in the wound, then administer lunar cautery in this way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the cautery needle is useful for both clotting blood and for cleaning the wound when it is corrupted.</start_of_turn>
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the testicles is corrupted and is destroyed at the same time, then you must insert into the meat of the prepuce a a plum catheter so that the patient can urinate for that.</start_of_turn
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the testicles (and this adhesion does not occur except in the case in which the prepuce is soft, and over it no circumcision is required; and when it occurs by wound or swelling) you must excise with blunt forceps until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the testicles is freed entirely.</start_of_turn
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to grasp them, you must excise with blunt forceps all around the head of the testicles and the prepuce, and know that when the prepuce is soft, firm as it is perforated by its softness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And put between the prepuce and the head of the testicles a piece of lint, which is already wet in the cold water so that it does not adhere to another vein.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And care for it with vinegar until it is solidified.</start_of_turn
Capitol .lvii.	End of text.</start_of_turn
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the castration of children and the care of what occurs in those who undergo circumcision.</start_of_turn
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuality just like any other wound: however, even if it is our operation and our will, and because of that it is properly done in children, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and way less suffering for the loss of life.</start_of_turn
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not ordain circumcision in any of their laws, because they did not use it, and it is only because we have learned through experience that the greatest part of physicians and barbers use to circumcise and castrate with new instruments and with nails; and they use thread and sting.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already proved all these methods and I do not find a better mutilation than that with forceps, thread and needle that when it is done to the testicles the codena escapes more easily, for the cord of the prepuce is split into two tunics, and the tension is left behind, and it is strong enough to force another incision and pain without doubt.</start_of_turn
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And as for the castration which is useful for almsgiving and is digital, which is what the tailors use, it is not followed by the incision of the extremity of the virile member, for it is strong enough to enter the cavity of it.</start_of_turn
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	More on the operation, let me observe further, for you are corrupting the work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it does not require modification, and I have seen such a case.</end_of_turn>
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More on the modification that you make with the forceps and sutures, I have learned from experience that excessive force should not be used, for when the force is too great, the sensation that remains is just as great; and therefore, as you promised your hand, I shall now proceed with the incision according to a comparison at a suitable time; and it is enough to compress the suture with the shape that contains the cord of the fetus from the start to the end, without causing any error.</end_of_turn>
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you must take the child out mainly if he is of those that I understand to be small, do not take out the cord but simply tie the suture in its groove alone, and that you watch for that which enters on the other side the next day.</end_of_turn
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And indeed do so in such a way as is possible for you to receive her intelligence.</end_of_turn>
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And indeed do so in such a way as to make your hands appear more statuesque prepared in advance, and do not be seen to be clumsy; and hide the forceps in your hand or leave them at your feet, so that the child does not see them or any other instruments.</end_of_turn
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And indeed do so by placing your hand on the belly and blowing in the cord, and pulling that which enters until it comes out from the head of the cord, and then modify that which is added to it from the beginning.</end_of_turn
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And indeed do so by tying the sign with the suture doubled over, and then tie a little more below that one, and then I will tell you where to place your hand and indicate that the place of the suture remains well retained, and I shall make the incision between two sutures.</end_of_turn
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And indeed do so by raising the cord gently and extracting the head of the cord; and then watch carefully little by little, for that is better; and stop the bleeding by powder over the bleeding and on the powder put a bandage with ointment composed of oil of rosemary recently boiled; and leave that on until tomorrow; and care for that until it is healed.</end_of_turn
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The way of the forceps for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The outer handles are non-taloned, and the inner handles are taloned, so that it does not irritate the flesh of the thumb, and the length of the two acute angles is as great as the length of two thumbs together.</end_of_turn
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More, the error in modification is that if you force too much you will expel the intrinsic cord entirely, or part of it from the incision.</end_of_turn
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore you must extend that of your hour at your nail before the apostematization of the place and that you make the incision according to equality.</end_of_turn
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it at your nail, then extract it with your hand and make the incision again.</end_of_turn
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	More, if three days have passed and the cord remains flat from the outset, then you must watch until the apostemata of the cord has subsided, and then extract that which remains easily, and make the incision as you are prepared.</end_of_turn
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And take care of the head of the cord, so that it does not come to it.</end_of_turn
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore care for that which concerns the consolidation of the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.</end_of_turn>
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is necessary to make an incision of the cord beyond measure, and you obey the parts above, do not notice it to them.</end_of_turn
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And indeed do so with that which we have said until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the care of retained urine in the bladder.</end_of_turn>
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retained urine in the bladder is caused by excessive population, for stone or for sand, or for poverty or for meat, and it remains like those which we have said concerning the methods of care in the division.</end_of_turn
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is already in the belly of the bladder, then you must encourage the patient to walk around on his heels.</end_of_turn
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And indeed do so by composing the feet of the patient on the two heels and extending the belly of the limb from the part furthest from the heel, and the patient will strain the area as much as possible.</end_of_turn
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore the hour of the bladder is constrained to expel the stone to the back parts, because the urine is complete.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved in water that we have said, harsh is the cause of the disease, the hour that we must administer extraction from it with an instrument that is called a syringe, which is like this: of silver or of lead hammered, like a nail with a round head, to which be added a tube of lead with a length equal to that of a palm and a half, to which be added a little bit of lead at the head.</end_of_turn>
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of extracting the urine for that is that you take the bladder fold and bind it at the root of the bladder; and you bring out the bladder from the belly through the flank of the loin, and prick with the forceps if there is any hardness remaining, more especially if you insert the finger into the tube with force.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And do the patient rest on the bench, and cover the bladder with a cloth and vinegar with olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And immediately insert the bladder through ease until it reaches the level of the navel; and then bend the navel downwards to the part of the abdomen; and then bring down the bladder along with it; and then bring down the bladder until it reaches the bladder, and the patient is relieved of the pain, and that is not useful according to this order, but the meat in which there is torpidity.</end_of_turn>
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually pull out the bladder with the thread, so that the urine follows the thread.</end_of_turn>
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And extract it and do urinary care, and use the bladder, do not leave it until the bladder is evacuated and the pain is relieved.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .lix.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	What is the quality of the bladder catheterization from this time on, and what instruments will be in agreement with the water?</end_of_turn
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or swelling in the bladder, or it is congested with gravel, or it is contracted due to pain, and you wish to drain urine and medicines, the hour is to use a clamp catheter, which is like this:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if in the extraction of the liquid it is deaf, so it is closed.</end_of_turn
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in this there are three tracts: two of one side, like when it is repeated.</end_of_turn
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is the liquid with the sediment, and is as much as the quantity that covers that, until when any cause is overcome from that, it is thrown away, and when it is expelled, with that it is thrown away, and when it is expelled long, according to the quantity of the clamp catheter that is placed in the battles of the sea.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore if you wish to expel humors from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp catheter into the humidity, and pull out that liquid that is deposited in the parts above, because the humidity is expelled in the curvature of the clamp catheter.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And immediately insert the extremity of the clamp catheter into the navel according to what we have recommended in the bladder; and then bring down the humidity with the water, because that humidity returns to the bladder at the same time, and the pain is relieved at that.</end_of_turn
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle crystallization of the bladder, which is this:</start_turn
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is useful either of silver or lead, of which the head is like a small pen, and is held by a thread.</start_turn
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And immediately grasp the bladder from its movement, and stop in that place the humidity that you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong thread doubled, and scald that humidity over the fire.</start_turn
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And immediately insert the extremity of the crystallization into the navel.</start_turn
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And immediately place your hand over the bladder with the humidity at a stretch until the pain is relieved that that humidity has already reached the bladder.</start_turn
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if your bladder is not present, the hour is to take a bundle of wool and make of that circle; and pierce that through all its roundness; and immediately insert the strong thread into those veins, even if they are revolting; and immediately add the circle so that it is added to the sponge, because you rest in that water that you wish to expel humors from, and oil and vinegar.</start_turn
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And immediately tie that in the instrument and do like you did with the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.</start_turn
Capitol .lx.	Capitol. lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	De extraccio de peyra.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquella que es ficada en la vesica.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquella entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es difícil curacio en les viels.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Portanto cum pervenem a la curacio de aquella, cove al comensament de aquella que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquella fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquella peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	The stone is slippery and difficult to grasp, for its angles and margins are sharp.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And thus it is like a lion’s claw, round and it is slippery from its smoothness.</end_of_turn>
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is the one whose angles and margins are like this, adjust it in the fissure.</end_of_turn>
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not like this, then cover what is above it with your hand, or grasp firmly what is below it adequately, the limb which is like this with a lime, and do not neglect it; or that you enter and leave behind the instruments of curved limb.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Or if you do not see that, increase the wound a little, and if you see discharge of pus, cut off the infected part that is causing it.</end_of_turn
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Or if the stone is bigger than one, then at the beginning of the operation you grasp the hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then you prick it there; and then grasp a little of the stone.  Like this do if there are several stones of greater size.</end_of_turn
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is large, it is ignorant to insert it into that great cavity, because it causes to the patient two evils: either that it remains there or that it causes continuous discharge of urine, for which reason the limb is not completely consolidated.</end_of_turn
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Or administer expulsion of it as soon as it is possible, or make an opening in the fracture of the limb with forceps, and extract that in pieces.</end_of_turn
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe leaves and dragon's blood, and grasp that.</end_of_turn
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And rest on that limb soaked in oil and wine, or in scented oil and warm water, so that the burn becomes softened.</end_of_turn
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And provide the patient with rest on the bed, and do not remove the dressing until the third day.</end_of_turn>
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has gone, bathe the limb with water and a little oil, and care for it with ointment and balsam until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Or if in the wound there is remaining a burn, stick to it and do not remove it, and if it appears like the urine is frozen in the bladder, that is to say that it is the prohibited urine (and that is known for the emission of the urine with blood), then enter the gut said in the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause the bladder to corrupt and putrefy.</end_of_turn
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And finally wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and against all spices, against anything that could impede its healing until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And keep throughout all the care that you lie both thighs together and adjust the medicines that are placed over the limb.</end_of_turn
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the marrow, and is fixed in it, and there is no discharge of urine, then care for that as follows: since this cure is recommended only when it is necessary, because it is reproved for this treatment, and indeed I have seen it condemned for this care.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular incision, acute, fixed in place.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take hold firmly, and keep the marrow away from the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And enter the needle in the marrow, perforating easily until the needle reaches that stone.</end_of_turn
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the needle on your hand over that small stone, and you will pierce the wound until you have pierced that of the other side to pass it out; for the urine will be discharged completely.</end_of_turn
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And place your hand over what remains of the stone from the part of the marrow that is torn away, which is dripping and is discharged with the urine, and the patient is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Or if this treatment does not please you for any reason, then tie a thread around the stone and another around the stone to remove it.</end_of_turn
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And burn the stone in that marrow between two threads.</end_of_turn
E aprop extratz aquela.	And extract that.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And remove the thread and bandage the wound with ointment, which is useful in the wound.</end_of_turn
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you must inquire about the patient's diet in order to understand what you are being told about what they want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see the flow of urine, adjust in the outer area that is irritated and leave it for an hour until the urine has stopped flowing, and then return to your procedure until the stone has passed.</end_of_turn>
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make ready all your instruments as they are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you are helped in your procedure.</end_of_turn>
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see the flow of urine, and you know that the evacuation of the urine is from a stone that is lodged in the bladder, then stop the bleeding by pressing on the area and open that area with a forceps, but do not do anything further; let the stone pass and do not extract it, for that would cause more damage.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua.	And take care of the wound.</end_of_turn>
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the pain of the stone has subsided, leave the area alone for a few days, and then return to your procedure until the stone has passed.</end_of_turn
Capitol lxii.	Chapter lxii.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the surgery of an abdominal hernia.</end_of_turn
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white sac which contains the intestines and is called a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	There are several veins in the proper bowel which nature has prepared in the part of the intestines, until it is complete; and that is the cord of the genetius between the white sac which we have mentioned, and it is not water but bile.</end_of_turn
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The cause of this hernia is by excessive pressure on the genetius, because at those it is infiltrated by this matter, and sometimes it happens by a violent blow that is done on the genetius.</end_of_turn
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has various colors, because its color is declining to yellow or bloody, or sometimes it is black and feculent, or it is white and watery, and that is the best.</end_of_turn
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs by which it is known that this accumulation of liquid is in the white sac that we have mentioned, are that when it is pressed it is slightly rounded down in length as if it were a ball of water, and the genetius appears, because the liquid contains all around it.</end_of_turn
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the liquid is in the proper bowel, then when it is pressed it is rounded down towards the part of the intestine and by this it is believed that it is another portion of intestine.</end_of_turn
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the liquid is between the cord of the genetius and the white sac, then leave it alone.</end_of_turn
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the liquid, then express the color of the liquid from the swelling by cutting a piece of the substance which precedes the swelling; and according to what comes out in the residue, judge of what is contained in it.</end_of_turn
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of it, we must command the patient to abstain from eating if that is possible, and sometimes to lie down.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And make them rest on two pillows on any cause a little high, and stop them from moving around.</end_of_turn
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And sit down on the left side of them, and command the servant to follow on the right side of them, who will extend his thumb from two fingers to the cord of the genetius and the part of the navel of the belly.</end_of_turn
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And take hold of the thumb and split the cord of the genetius from the middle part of the limb to the length almost to the fifth finger.</end>
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to the rule at an equal distance from the line that should be drawn over the skin of the genetius, until it reaches the white sac including.</end_of_turn>
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And evacuate that, and observe, and keep me informed so that I do not cut that; and your evacuation with which you evacuate that part should be suspended with the greater and subtler humors and written on the skin according to the amount that is possible for you.</end_of_turn
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the full sack with a wide perforation, and extract all the liquid.</end_of_turn
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two layers of the incision with scissors, and stretch the sac downwards; do not touch the cord of the genetius including, and close the sac in that manner that is possible for you.</end_of_turn
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And pierce the whole or in parts, and especially let it be with a needle, because if you do not precisely pierce the area, it is not safe that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Even if there proceeds from that area beyond the hip in the hour of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the sac, return the gut, and then adjust the two flaps of the hip towards the genitals with sutures, and take care of this just as with the other wounds, until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the gut corrupted by another disease, then know that you must ligate the vessels which are sore the suspenders, and extract the gut, and take care of this as we have said.</end_of_turn>
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is added in two parts it is sufficient; therefore pierce that part as much as you did in the other swelling; and if you are of the opinion that it is an operation, then do it.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then withdraw the blood, and enter into the sections of the fatty substance submerged in oil or in scented oil; and place another layer of fat which you have submerged in wine and oil over two genitals and the belly; and place over that a bandage which you have doubled and powdered, and ligate those over like this:</end_of_turn
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and take two cloths and fill them with coarse wool according to this shape; and ligate the extremities which are between the knee or the wet wool, and join them together in the groin of the thighs, and one of the extremities extends to the belly button within two fingers, and the other extends to the loin, and two extremities over two toes and two others over two fingers, and join all the restrictions in the groin of the thighs.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And many hernias of this kind are medicated artificially with cautery in place of incision with iron; and it is that you take pointed cautery and pierce that area of the hip, and it is ignited as we have recommended until the white sac containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cautery as we have said.</end_of_turn
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and is assembled in Greek letters.</end_of_turn>
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And pierce that sac, and it is ignited until all the moisture is expelled.</end_of_turn
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And stretch out the sac with fingers, and evacuate it with fingers, and evacuate with pointed cautery ignited; and pierce that according to what is possible until you have eradicated everything; and take care that the fire does not touch you.</end_of_turn
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more saving and more lasting than an incision.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if during the incision or the cautery or the flux of blood there is opposition, know that you must take care of whatever opposition is done to you for that reason, with the care that you are accustomed to give to them.</end_of_turn
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	And if the disease is slight, and you do not expect the second operation because of its horror, know that you must administer the perforation as we have recommended; and it is when it is certified that you must, for the things we have said about the significance, that that hernia is harmless.</end_of_turn
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Know that you must place the patient above any elevated area, and pierce the apostema in the lower part of it at the waist, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.</end_of_turn
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to drain out all the water.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place over the area the knee and ligate that and leave that, so that the water remains there.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care of that until the wound is healed.</end>
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	And if there is opposition when the water comes out in that hour you perforate that: and the water is not useful except for the fact that the white membrane in the orifice of the wound prevents the escape of the water, know that you must put in the wound a little or some instrument with which to extract the water from the abscess, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the oppression of the wound a little piece of sponge.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is added again with wine in a few months or in February; and when it is added, pierce that according to that custom, for the disease will also pass those seven days.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 163.</end_of_turn>
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of incision concerning the cartilaginous hernia and its care.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Sapias that in this section concerning this hernia there is fear of loss of consciousness in the greater arrangements; for I see the dismissal of them and their preservation for that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in that case and the species of the apostemas.</end_of_turn>
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that apostemas arise in the testicles of those who have them composed and that it is caused by various causes: or by sudden excessive moisture which is spread to the testicles, or by impact.</end_of_turn>
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the apostema is according to the color of the testicles, and it is not found in pain, and is a hard apostema.</end_of_turn
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a soft apostema is often seen, of which the color is dark, and is not firm to the touch.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And certain herbs are useful for the swelling of the arteries, and for the inflammation of those veins which are already perceived, or for the inflammation of veins.</end_of_turn
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Moreover, that which is for the inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the apostema when you compress that which is between the testicles; and do not touch that.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	Moreover, that which is useful for the inflammation of the veins is not dispersed by any cause due to compression of those.</end_of_turn>
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is already possible that in this species it is useful to make an incision and over the others meats; and that you insert the needle of the testicles, and then stretch the skin downwards, and extract that from the white sack, and deliver the sperm of the vessels, and link them, and insert more sperm than you deliver from all parts of the skin.</end_of_turn
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the testicles are already solidified in those meats, then cover that you extract the testicles and insert that.</end_of_turn
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any cause of the sack, or between those which are between the veins, then cover that you deliver all that adhesion and insert that by incision around.</end_of_turn
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Moreover, if it is born from meat in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then cover that you insert all that which is of it, and extract the testicles as we have said.</end_of_turn
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with soft wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and take care of that as soon as the other care is completed until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxiv.	End of text.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the care of hernia which is of great importance.</end_of_turn>
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is apostema enveloped by any covering resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is useful to exercise difficult movement and walking on the patient.</end_of_turn
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the care of this disease it is for fear of that which precedes the recollection.</end_of_turn
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However we must say the operation in which the first appears.</end_of_turn
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that one should make the patient lie on a high cushion; and then insert the sperm of the testicles to the lower parts; and take hold of the testicles with the hands that are to be verified; and have those other ministers that you have, and extend those with violent extension.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And immediately insert with a blunt knife a transverse incision through the sack of the vessels until the vessels are revealed.</end_of_turn
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And immediately extract all that we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.</end_of_turn
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And leave in those a needle which is doubled over, and link that at the first place where it happened, and link that other herb at the end of them.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And immediately insert those at the middle of the belly for transverse incision according to the length of the body, and extract what is added of the foul and corrupt humors.</end_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And take care of the wound with the care of the other wounds in which you wish to be cured so that the vessels which support one of the two testicles are not injured, which is not bad for that.</end_of_turn
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Moreover, if all the veins are injured, then cover that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles because of the vessels are crushed, for that is private of all nourishment for the nourishment of the veins, and that they are established, or that they are crushed so that they are not useful with those.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Capital .lxv.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The origin of this hernia is by incision that extends over the abdomen from the flanks of the navel, so that the intestines coming from the rupture are intermingled with the abdominal fat.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	Or this rupture is of the bladder or of excess of gas, and these two things happen for various causes: either by percussion, or by swallowing, or by straining, or by elevation of any serious cause, or by remaining in a sitting position for a long time
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this is that if it is an extension of the bladder, it happens slowly over a long time, and does not happen abruptly, and the edema subsides within a few days without any treatment.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is that if it is an incision of the bladder, at the beginning it causes severe pain immediately; and it is edema that makes the belly appear swollen, and this is because of the displacement of the intestine by the tumor of the bladder against the walls of the abdomen
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Therefore every physician must know how to treat this hernia of the intestines immediately, because it is an urgent thing that must not be delayed
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some physicians are of the opinion that the cause of this hernia is excessive wind, others that it is caused by a wound in the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is in this way that it causes great suffering, and other physicians say that it is caused by violent vomiting and mostly when it is accompanied by pain
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this disease there is fear, for that one must fear that it will escape from the physician's grasp in that moment.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The way of operating in this case is that you command the patient to reduce the swelling of the belly with their hand to the extent that they can bear, and if they obey your order, then put a wet compress over the area between their thighs and hold their legs up.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then close the opening which is between the testicles and the skin, and suture the opening of the testicles all the way through; and at the end of the suture close the two lips of the incision as much as you wish to open the incision with those things
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the opening is large as you are able, that from that one must not forget the dressing of the wound
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And immediately remove from that area the phlegmas which are left in the opening of the testicles, until the white hard membrane of some part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you must empty the intestine called in this case testicles, between the white membrane which is left in the opening of the intestines, which is left in the opening of the wound, and the membrane which is between them, and remove from that the adhesion which is in the back of the wound
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And finally put your hand over the opening of the testicles at the edges, and with your left hand extend the white membrane towards your hand, and elevate the intestine with the membrane towards the incision; and command the assistant to extend the intestine outwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a solution accomplished
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek that there be no cause for the swelling of the belly covered with the white hard membrane.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	Maybe you will find some cause of this in the belly that you left behind
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And take a needle on which is strong enough to make a hole of about four threads, and insert that into the belly which is under the opening of the testicles, which is the one you left open; and when you have inserted it through four threads, remove the needle and pass the two ends through the hole so that they make a cross; and tie them together with the two threads that remain on either side of the wound
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And cover the ends of the threads and tie them together with strong thread so that no vessel which has been injured in that place can cause any cause for this to happen again
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And wait another hour before closing the wound, about three times that of the first; and then join two threads which you leave from the abdomen which is left open at the amount of the size of the thumb, and insert them through all the remaining parts according to the roundness, and keep them there for a while.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And finally insert inside the opening of the testicles for the incision of which we have spoken, so that there runs blood and air out of it as we have recommended above
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And give a soaked bandage in oil, and wait on the wound; and administer the thread which we have recommended (and several physicians cauterize the white membrane of the abdomen, which we have mentioned above in order to prevent the flow of blood, because many physicians say that these happen in those).
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	May it be that despite the delay of the case, the hour of cold water is opportune, and pause until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And thus treat the plague with the other care of the plagues until it is healed
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66
De hernia ventosa.	Of windy hernia
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia nothing has been observed that has been omitted in its care
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And first say that it is useful in this hernia as we have recommended in the other hernia that is in the vein; that you ligate the vessels near the section where it is necessary to facilitate them; and dry in the midst of the place around the abscess with water until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Care for the plague as we have said until it is healed
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that is useful in the ankle bones
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some veins outside break in the ankles as we have said, and examine the place
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not cause the geneuses any cause of the bulges to the geneuses; and if you cause them, it is little; and return in all hours
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	May it be that despite the prolonged time of the water, an adjusted fracture is made in the tibia until the bubble disappears in the tibia; and do this because of the extension of the tibia which is in the ankles as we have said, which cause is that the tibia is stretched, and therefore it is softened and the place is apostematized and examined
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the care of it is like that which precedes the narration.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And many wounds are cured with iron according to this manner: the patient lies over the seat of two between his thighs, and dry the place of the rupture of the abscesses examined with a section for the breadth according to the quantity of three fingers
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And dry the white tibia that is under the knee until it is discovered
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And take the ray and stop it on the prominent part of the tibia, and press that against the navel
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And press the two prominent parts over the extremity of the tibia, and suture one of them to the other
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And extract the extremity of the tibia, and do not insert the tibia from the heel, nor extend the heel, nor any other cause like that which I tell you in the care of intestinal hernia
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And care for it like the care of the plagues, and when it has been inserted, soften it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the tibia is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And it is better in this place, for it is more likely to recover
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the knee of the testicles
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many wounds the knee of the testicles in various houses are softened to help soften the flesh that is between them, and feed it accordingly
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When necessary it is necessary that the patient sits according to the seat of two, and dissect the whole knee which is softened over the natural knee; and then suture two lips together
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	Or if you wish, when you commence to soften the knee with three sutures or four and a firm suture
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And insert between the sutures; and care for the care of the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds fall off
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69
De castracio.	Of castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Wisdoms that castration is prohibited in our law, however I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except for two cases, of which one is that the physician should know the care of it when it is questioned about it, since he knows the care of it to which it corresponds; and the other case is that we must sometimes castrate other animals for our judgments for those, as well as mares, and sows, and goats, and for such like beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is useful in two ways: or by traction, or by incision at section
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	May be in that which is causing the pain, the way of the work is that we must make them cease the beast in cold water until the veins of them become softened and limp and that they hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And immediately take hold of them with your hand so that they do not appear to touch them again
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	May be in castration there is pain for fracture and section, cover that you have the beast and press the testicles of them with your left hand
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And immediately bind the supporters, and pierce concerning any humor on a section until two humors proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And immediately pierce those which have been scorched
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not let them be about those of the hips any cause, but the subtle hip which is above the veins
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this manner of castration is better than that which is for attrition, because attrition strong would leave any cause of the testicles so that the beast would desire to bite
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And immediately care for the plague until it is healed
Capitol .lxx.	End of treatise.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the care of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two methods: the one is when it appears that the space between the testicles is cut off in that place where between two testicles appears what looks like a woman in which one can insert.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And many women of that age urinate in the space between the testicles
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women it is a kind: and it is that the known woman about the fifth is like two testicles of a man a little big and a little small at the end like two testicles of a man and two testicles
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the care is of three kinds: two of the men and one of the women
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you put your hands on those parts that are adjusted until you drive out the sign of that, and immediately care for those with care for the other diseases
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of the men of whom we have spoken who urinate in the space between the testicles, there is no care or operation in them
Capitol .xxi.	End of treatise
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the limping and the prominent belly in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Strong limping is adjusted for natural causes until it is relaxed and is done without regard; and many women experience swelling in various parts as much as in men and even during coitus
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore take hold of the excess of limping with your hand or with an instrument and pierce it
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not hesitate in incision, especially in the groin, so that there should be no discharge of urine.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And immediately care for that which is with care for the diseases until it is healed
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May be no new flesh is flesh that is not in the horror of the mother until it fills that, and strong is expelled from the parts at the end like a coat (and for this reason the first callers call it “caudal disease”); therefore take hold of it like that which is taken of limping and care for that until it is healed
Capitol .lxxii.	End of treatise
De curacio de alratica.	On the care of the ulcer
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The ulcer is that which does not pierce the known woman, or that which has a small hole
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either natural or accidental
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is by disease which has preceded, and that which is done or for no adjusted flesh or for subtle or thick fat
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is either in the groin or in the belly, or on the sides, or on the belly of it, or on the buttocks, and prohibits lying down and standing up and sitting down, and strong urine prohibits menstruation
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is profitable for regarding the uterus, if the swelling is apparent, it is recommended; but if it is not apparent, the hour you seek that which is in the belly or in the ribs.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if the swelling is for subtle fat, and is recommended to the two lips, the hour you touch and break that
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And so you should place your hand over the two lips and indicate with your tongue that they are indeed cold.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should place her feet upon the two heels, the heels spread wide, and then stretch the two lips as forcefully as necessary until that soft bag is ruptured and the fluid is opened
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool and soak it in oil and place it upon the area, and keep it there until the area is healed so that it does not solidify
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the bag is large and full, it is necessary to cover it with some soft cotton wool or a leaf of myrtle
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the fluid is bloody, suspend the bleeding for a moment, and then incisions the area.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And so with the medicines which cause the cessation of the flow of blood, such as vinegar, and wine, and enxofre, adjusted with alum of vinegar.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad needle of lead so that the wound is not solidified carelessly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep it for several days and administer cold lime juice
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And so with the other care of consolidation until it is healed
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Many times these accidents happen in the great majority of births of other animals, and so you should incisions according to this manner
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If there is swelling of the brain, do not make incisions against the swelling in any way
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 163.</start_of_turn>
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the care of haemorrhoids, piles and red swelling that occur in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Haemorrhoids are caused by the congestion of the veins around the rectum, and as long as they are not excessively painful, they should be treated conservatively
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already spoken about the different kinds of these and their signs, and I say that those who receive treatment and those who do not receive treatment should be treated differently
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that haemorrhoids and piles are not very painful when they are in the prime of life and do not cause discomfort, it is not necessary to treat them with iron
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	If however they are in the groin and cause discomfort, then they must be treated
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And so you should place the woman in a cold bath and extend her with the thumbs upwards, or with rough hands, and incisions should be made at the root of the veins
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And so sprinkle over those veins the flow of blood from one of the incisions so that the bleeding stops, just like vinegar and the like
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And so keep the legs pressed for an hour, and then stop that for cold water
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, do that which will cause decoction of alum and of poppy seeds and of mustard and of vinegar and the like
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And so take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with water over both of them
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the blood is clotted, it is good; otherwise, adhere to two cushions, and to the nipples sacrifice.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And so take wool and soak it in the juice of cocksfoot or in the juice of elderberry or in the juice of pomegranate with a little wine and adhere it to the area; and care for the area until it is healed
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	However much it may appear rough regarding that which I have said in the previous paragraph, you should incisions according to what I have said about the remedy for swelling.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for the area until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 164.</start_of_turn
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of an abscess that occurs in the groin.</start_of_turn>
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	There are various kinds of abscesses that occur in the groin, such as carbuncle and lap land abscess, ulcerous and infected, abcess of the rectum, haemorrhoidal fistula and other abscesses of the groin and thigh and heel and others.</start_of_turn
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already spoken of these diseases and their kinds and their signs, and their cures which are mentioned in the division
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	I will tell you in this treatise of the caut which is used in the groin when it is a carbuncle, and if you wish to know how it is performed with the iron, I will tell you
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e veces aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then consider that you must cease the pain over a bladder that has two bladders; recline on the buttocks two and adjust the feet of the patient below the belly, and the buttocks will be expanded, and stop the hands of the patient below the navel, and tie whatever is convenient to them
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And approach the matron following the lord's order and administer the instrument with which the opening of the major orifice has been made, the form of which will come in those cases that make it necessary.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And consider that when you administer this instrument, stay with the edge of the major orifice of the bladder, and what enters from the instrument into the bladder should not be more than the edge of the bladder and cause the patient pain.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the edge of the bladder, then consider that you should sprinkle powder over the surface of the edge of the bladder so that the insertion of any instrument into the bladder is prohibited
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And consider that you should stop the vertigo that runs in the instrument of the lord once it is detached and that the minister should hold the instrument and rotate the vertigo until it is inserted into the major orifice of the bladder.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the evacuation is complete, and it is grasped by hand and is lean and wet, then consider that you should remove the head of the instrument from the wound with a sponge soaked in fat
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the urine is evacuated, consider that you should place a wick soaked in olive oil or green oil at the opening of the bladder; and stop the bleeding at the incision in the major orifice of the bladder.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And stop the bleeding from the bladder and put a clean bandage over the wound soaked in water in which are boiled mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And approach both cured two days from now and until today when they are convenient to water until they are healed
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And every day the bladder and the wound are washed with water and vinegar, and with water in which lilies or long-stemmed violets are boiled, and then return to the wound
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound in the bladder is inflamed and swollen, consider that you should refrain from its care with iron, having cared for what has been said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 165.</end_turn>
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how to properly handle patients with unusual figures.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should already know in the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth for signs of it, and that when a woman gives birth to the parts beyond and wants to smell the air, and what is expelled by her about what is above, and it is stifled by what is below, the hour knows that this part is of a natural figure, and that is the sensation of it on the head, and the second that it is about that or the umbilical cord or suspension.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, consider that the belly of the womb should be compressed so that the embryo can give birth easily when it comes out of the head, and that it is moistened from those superfluities with good management.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	More than that, that part is not natural and unusable, because when the embryo is ejected from its feet and the body of the fetus is ejected in front of the head of the fetus, and the hand of the fetus, or at the foot of the fetus, etc., then... ...or the head of the fetus and the hand of the fetus, or at the belly of the fetus, and it turns into a figure like those that are not usable
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is that the midwife be wise and skillful in all those cases, and that she guard against error and deception
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show you all the figures of those things, and what is their meaning for what is significant and what has been stated about it
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is ejected from the head for natural evacuation, and that is vehement over the woman and is difficult for her, and sometimes the virtue of the woman is already exhausted, the hour recommends that one should do what the women have to do, and that one should expel the afterbirth with rue and with oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And approach the matron between the thighs and say to her that we must insert a little sponge and open that which is at the second part, or cut that which is at the navel until it comes out what is in it of humidity
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Maybe if it does not descend, the hour covers that the woman be impregnated with mucus of peas and fennel with blood.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And order them to lie down, to cover themselves with a blanket, to compress and to prevent them from vomiting; put your hand over their mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus will be forgotten as much as possible
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two pains of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, the hour covers that you reduce them gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	Maybe if they do not obey the command, the hour pauses the woman over a cushion and lifts their feet up, and then put the cushion on the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall off the cushion
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the two pains do not cease, and the fetus dies, the hour incites those two and delivers the fetus or binds its body to the hand of the patient and delivers that as well, because that will be forgotten
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Like this from the navel to the knees.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is over the knees, the hour covers that you press those against its sides, and then make the fetus small, and that you bring that close, and that you take a hand of the patient and extend the other little by little
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Maybe when they are like this inside the thighs, the hour orders them to cry out, and make them vomit with force, because if God wills it, that will be forgotten too
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten in this that we have recounted, the hour returns the fetus gradually until it pauses that second figure natural, because that will be the hour forgotten in delight.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited in all that we have recounted, the hour takes from high mucus and gum dissolved, and pierces all in the heel for good percussion, and then put a little pressure on the place where the woman's hand was, the pus from the belly of her
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And order that this be done in water that boils, until it succeeds in emptying them completely.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when sometimes the limbs leave them soft, the hour gives them a fumigation of myrtle and pauses that for them
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the fumigation has lasted for an hour, the hour orders that it be placed on a cushion, and order that it vomit and stretch its mouth, take away from that, and press the lower part of the belly of her lightly, so that the fetus will be forgotten as much as possible
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Like this from the navel to the knees and their feet
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is lying like this, the hour orders you to put in its mouth little by little; and that the woman should be supported on the hip over the thigh, and that the feet should be placed on the ground, and those should rest on the thighs, and finish filling up its belly
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And order gently to press on the belly little by little, and order to extract what is left of the feet from the ankles until it is ready in the lower part of the belly.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not forgotten, the hour takes their feet and moves them violently, and order gently to press what is on the hips little by little until the fetus comes out of the thighs.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And order to put in its mouth little by little and bring the fetus small, and order the woman to cry out until the fetus is forgotten
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Like this when the fetus is latently hanging from one of its legs
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Try to reduce its hand, but if that cannot be done, the hour raises the woman and makes her push forward
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if pushing does not suffice, the hour makes the woman lie on her side, and with great pressure wrestles the thighs of the patient, and order to administer to her liquids that are warm and recommended by mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if it is urgent for childbirth, the hour orders that it be placed on a cushion, and order to study the reduction of the hand, and to deliver the fetus according to the natural figure, and to make the woman vomit and order her to press herself until it is forgotten
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Like this when the fetus is over the buttocks, expand its limbs and the belly of the fetus is two-thirds of its greatest size
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the midwife has the hand of the fetus and gently turns that little by little, and that will facilitate it
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equal in amount, and when it has become equal, then pause your hand over the head of the patient, where we have recommended oil and unguents.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command them to move their hand slowly, and when you have finished, then cease upon a cushion and command them to lean forward, and command them to be compressed; and let them vomit at will.</end_of_turn>
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared to come out through the wide opening.</end_of_turn>
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they groan from the mother according to this manner, consider, and when you have finished, then insert your finger into the moisture until it is expelled.</end_of_turn
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended on the face and the head, then insert your finger into the navel, so that it is not retained and remains.</end_of_turn
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then pull the fetus towards the buttocks until you pause when you have covered that which covers, and command the woman to press her thighs together, and the spirit will be gone from her eyes if God wills or no.</end_of_turn>
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or many fetuses.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Be wise that twin births from many eggs are rare, and sometimes three or four are born, which is strange and perilous; for these things are not from ordinary causes, but from God.</end_of_turn
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those which are multiplied, whether by one or more, and are separated by the cord, distinguish those which are within the ligament of the navel of each of those eggs, and each egg is expelled as it were naturally from the womb; and so remain several eggs which are not able to be delivered naturally as we have recommended.</end_of_turn
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, you must perform an operation and go until we have spoken of the unnatural figures, then take care of those as we have recommended.</end_of_turn
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is discreet and makes it easy and pleasant, and is prompt and intelligent according to the figure as she has prepared for the danger to health.</end_of_turn
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that they are formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women have periods that last one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, or nine days, and it is enough to verify that a woman has a period when six months have passed without one, or for nine months altogether.</end_of_turn>
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is covered by the science of the midwife who is strong in that part like that, and therefore does not pause until she has covered that.</end_of_turn
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter Lxxvi.</end_of_turn
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.</end_of_turn
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it does not depart naturally, and you must use an operation with a hand, then cover that you consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not likely to suffer from the accidents for which she is feared to be in danger.</end_of_turn
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then cover that the woman is covered over the genitals over the seat of the two, and that her head is inclined towards the chest and her thighs are raised.</end_of_turn
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister has that of two parts or is bound in the genitals for so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And moisten the mouth of the mother with oil of olives and with high mucilage of fennel and seed of lily.</end_of_turn
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And put your hand on the midwife's hand with those oils and mucilages, and interlace your hand with hers in the belly, and seek with your hand the hand in which the nails remain in the fetus.</end_of_turn
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place it conveniently in that place: where you consider that the fetus is prepared that it should be delivered headfirst, and when you have held the nails in the heels of the fetus, or in the head, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the beard, or in the chin, or in the flanks, or leave the hip bones.</end_of_turn
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	May it be that the cause of the pain is in the feet, in the fifth [toe], or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And let us take hold of the thumb with the left hand, and let us break the curvature of it at that place which is between the knuckles of the left hand, and interpose the hand so that the thumb remains in place at these places until the cause of the pain has disappeared.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And let us pause for a moment and remain in this position another thumb, or a third if necessary, so that there is equal traction and not simply extension according to its rectitude.</end_of_turn
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus may we massage the whole part, so that the sensation of the pain is alleviated as is done in the case of toothache by the extirpation of the tooth.</end_of_turn>
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And let us say that between these [thighs] the extension is softened; and if any part of them is retained, the lady should anoint with oil the edges of their fingers and interpose these and rotate over those that are retained.</end_of_turn>
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the foot is extruded, let us exchange the thumbs between those which are outside; and do so until the whole foot is extruded.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	However if the hand is swollen before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that due to the stiffness of the parts, let us wrap around that [affected limb] with a bandage; and let us extract that until the whole thing is extruded, and then we shall puncture that or at the junction of the thumb and the wrist.</end_of_turn>
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus let us also do on the other hand and on both feet.</end_of_turn>
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	However if the head of the foot is large, or if it is swollen in the sensation, or if there is water adjusted in the head, let us interpose between the knuckles a cushion of spines and split the head and extract the water, or that we scrape that with an instrument which is named “alundat,” the shape of which will be like that of the other instruments in the capital which is similar to this.</end_of_turn
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And in a similar manner if the foot is large by nature: and let us puncture that with an instrument, or that we bind that with a bandage as we have said; and let us extract the bones with forceps.</end_of_turn
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and is contracted behind the furcula, let us split that until the moisture which is in the feet is expelled.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	However if it is not complicated, or if it does not obey this sensation, let us puncture the head as much as possible according to our skill.</end_of_turn
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the belly of the belly is swollen or is full of liquid, let us drain that until the moisture which is in it is expelled.</end_of_turn
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	However if the foot is above the knees, the traction of the thumb is light and the direction of the thumb towards the mouth of the palm is light.</end_of_turn
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	However if it is swollen behind the belly and the foot, let us extract that which is wrapped around our hand, and split the belly and the foot until the water which is in them runs out.</end_of_turn
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	However if the other members are relaxed and the head is returned, let the lady interpose the left hand; however if the mouth of the palm is open, let the lady put her hand into the armpit, and circle over that the head, and draw that towards the thumb; and let her interpose in that place one or two thumbs, and draw them towards those.</end_of_turn
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the palm is closed by swelling of the caut which has happened to it, let us not press upon it; let us rather administer an ointment of oily humors.</end_of_turn
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and keep the patient in lukewarm water that softens and hydrates.</end_of_turn
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is above the knee joint, let us if possible, make an incision: and let us administer what we have said concerning the foot seen.</end_of_turn
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, let us pierce in pieces, and extract it.</end_of_turn
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And let us say that we do not leave any cause of discomfort of the second kind.</end_of_turn
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, let us administer what we have said concerning the care of the caut which has happened to the palm.</end_of_turn
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If blood flows too freely, the hour descends into watery sweat and administer the other remedy.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead, and at that time another leech was taken out, and at the same time the other died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to me or to someone that after a long time after delivery in the belly there was an opening, and it was blown up until the blood was seen to be flowing out, and it started to swell up.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to take care of them, and I treated them for a long time, but the disease did not subside.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I left them for some time with some strong attraction, and I evacuated one of them, and a few days later I evacuated another one; and I was amazed that in the belly there was no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I again treated the disease, and I extracted from them four bones, the woman exists in the thousand milho at ease, and I have seen in such a way for a long time, without any relief from her disease.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I do not know what to say, but in this matter there is science and help for the physician to administer his cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	As for the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Like a spiral with which the belly is opened.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of forceps in which two hooks are grasped in two extremities of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	The hook must be more flexible than the extractor, and should be made of iron or bone or gut of boys.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle should be equal to two fingers, and the distance from each thumb to each index finger should be equal to one finger; and the length of each handle should be one palm and a half; and at the middle of two handles there should be two adjustments of that middle handle, which already are fixed, the length of which is the width of two palms and a little, and the width of each handle should be equal to two fingers, or a little more
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are introduced into the mouth of the belly so that it is opened with those two hooks when you rotate the two prescribed hooks.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to the previous one but more flexible and lighter
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It can be made of gut of eba or boys according to the form of the forceps
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of these there are two additional things which are like sometimes, and the length of these additional things is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the belly, the hour you make the woman lie on her side with her feet hanging down, open what is between the thighs of her.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument like forceps as if for grasping something, according to the degree of opening of the mouth of the belly until the uterus makes it so that you can do what you want
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the spiral which they call the ancient one:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of pushing in which the fetus is pushed out
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of holding the head of the fetus
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like forceps to which teeth are added at the end, as sometimes, and several veins are made like forceps in this way, as sometimes, to which teeth are added like teeth of a saw with which the incision is made and the fetus is contained
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The way of holding the fetus less
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The way of holding the fetus with a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The way of holding the fetus with two spines
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The way of forceps to which teeth are added at the end with which the head of the fetus is contained
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The way of holding the fetus with two extremities with which the head is separated
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The way of two wide spatulas
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercises, and when there are more of them the more the physician must be skilled, and more than anything else you must ask the men for their help with their number.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	Do not perform any work with those instruments, for their use is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	That action is not justifiable with those instruments.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second [substance/humor] is retained, you must forcefully expel it. Command the patient to expel it naturally, and if necessary, order them to vomit. Place your hand over their mouth and their nose, and if it continues to come up, do not be afraid to withdraw your hand.</end_of_turn>
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Or, take an egg-shell and pierce a hole in the covering above the big toe, and place it on herbs such as chamomile, rue, saffron, marjoram, and pomegranate seeds, as well as Arabic gum, mastic, and mastic lily.</end_of_turn>
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs, or some of them, should be submerged in water in the bowl, and place that above the fire.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a sponge made of papyrus in the mouth of the great toe, and keep it there until the vapor rises to the concave area of the toe.</end_of_turn>
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And do the same as we have said, and the second will be expelled quickly.</end_of_turn
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If it remains close to the wound and is not expelled, order the maid to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in milk of almonds, and mix that with the herbs and apply it to the area around the wound. When that has happened, take hold of the second and slowly pull it out little by little, as it is likely that the wound will become inflamed. Then insert your hand once more as we have recommended, and when you have found the second, extract that gradually following the rule so that the toe does not suffer excessive pain.</end_of_turn
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Repeat this until the sides are soft and the left and right are equal.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And regulate the amount of pain, so that it obeys and does not linger.</end_of_turn
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the toe is closed, as we have already recommended, the treatment with vomiting and the use of the bowl with herbs.</end_of_turn
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	However, if it is not expelled in all these ways that we have recommended, know that you must not tire of the attempt to expel it, for what comes out of the toe at the mouth of the toe is due to the female’s condition. Therefore, anoint that area with unguent and tetraherba; for that will bring relief within a few days and will be expelled without difficulty.</end_of_turn
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it has become pale, it is because of the bad odor at the head and in the stomach, which causes the patient’s suffering; and therefore know that sub-fumiguous remedies and convenient remedies with liquids are to be administered.</end_of_turn
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Indeed, the ancients often used sub-fumigation with rue and dried figs.</end_of_turn
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The way in which the instruments are used in which the woman is sub-fumigated is due to the retention of menses and the second [substance].</end_of_turn
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Whether by vision or by hearing.</end_of_turn>
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And keep the lower limb in the crotch and the upper limb over the fire, and the sub-fumigation over the sleeves of the fire.</end_of_turn
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Keep that within you until the sub-fumigation is consumed and repeat again.</end_of_turn
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	The treatment of the fistula of the young child is not perforated.</end_of_turn
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The young children do not have it, and the holes of their buttocks are not perforated, for they already secrete secretly and are oppressed.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore order the maid to pierce that [fistula] at the place we have mentioned; and if not, pierce it with a pointed instrument, and take care not to damage the surrounding area.</end_of_turn
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place over that ointment of wine and oil; and anoint that area until it is well healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is oppressed, stay in the hole for a few days, and keep it that way until the child can defecate on its own.</end>
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And indeed, oppression of the buttocks can occur from consolidation of plague or of edema; therefore know that that consolidation must be softened, and that it should be cured with the remedies and plaguaries that we have mentioned.</end_of_turn
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	The treatment of the fistulas that arise from the toes.</end_of_turn
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that arise in the lower part of the thighs are nodular and large, and arise from the buttock or in the space of the one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or abscess.</start_of_turn>
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodule is old and corrupted by moist white or purulent humidity, and some veins are seen to penetrate from these fistulas.</start_of_turn
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known for causing the patient to vomit by their emission and by heat; and some physicians use the patient's vomiting as a sign, and it is very useful for their emission.</start_of_turn
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from these fistulas some veins penetrate into the bladder, and into the marrow of the heel; and some penetrate into the groin and into the armpit.</start_of_turn
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And it is known that a penetrating fistula that enters the buttock does not penetrate, for your hand should be placed on the buttock and you should try to grasp or remove it from the fistula when it is soft.</start_of_turn
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	Or if it is swollen, when you sit down try to grasp or remove the swelling with your hand or with the heel of your hand.</start_of_turn
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not see any discharge of blood, urine or wind, as we have said, then it is certainly not penetrating, and you should take care of it.</start_of_turn
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates the bladder or the marrow of the heel, the sign of it is the emission of urine from that fistula, and the prohibition of its emission so that the area may be consolidated for medical treatment.</start_of_turn
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Or if it penetrates the groin or the bone and causes pain in the circumference, the sign of it is that the hand has penetrated here if it is not swollen in the bone, and pain in the circumference of the limb; and that from it there is discharge of pus; and that it is not useful for treatment, nor is it consolidated at once.</start_of_turn
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure for all, and the cure for them is the work and diligence of the physicians concerning which they are ordered to be treated.</start_of_turn
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and is not old, healing with iron is expected as you will recommend, and that which I have already done and proved.</start_of_turn
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that the patient lies between your legs towards the navel and raises their legs into your arms, the thighs are inclined towards the patient's belly, and you should try to grasp or remove the swelling with your hand, or with the heel of your hand if it is soft in the fistula, for you must know that the hand has penetrated here if it is not swollen in the bone, and pain in the circumference of the limb; and that from it there is discharge of pus; and that it is not useful for treatment, nor is it consolidated at once.</start_of_turn
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient is sitting on the buttocks, you must place your hand on the buttocks.</start_of_turn
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you sit on the hand, the hand has already penetrated on its own without your having to grasp or remove it; and indeed you must certainly know that it is penetrating; and if you do not work on it, it is not healing, as we have said.</start_of_turn
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	And indeed I say that in some homes it is healed in some people.</start_of_turn
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the treatment for which it is expected to help is that you burn the cautery pointed with the breadth of the fistula, as it is said before, and you insert that burning into the fistula until it comes out around the buttocks; and you do this two or three times until you know that all those tissues surrounding the fistula that seem like feathers of a sparrow are already adjusted.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And take care of those that are wrapped in cloth around the border until all those tissues that are adjusted are healed, and take care of those medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; but if not, it is not healed in any other way.</start_of_turn
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the hand enters but does not penetrate into the buttocks, which is on the buttock, and between that and the hand which is visibly swollen with flesh or fat, and sometimes the fistula breaks the surface of the heel, then the heel dries from the beginning of the fistula, and you see it dry on the hand, and it is freed both from the fistula and from the limb itself.</start_of_turn
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And you should soften those tissues that are surrounded by the fistula, which resemble a sparrow's quill, and do not remain from any cause.</start_of_turn
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May it be that during the course of treatment, when the patient experiences sudden inflammation of those parts, the physician should then cauterize with fire or an acute medical instrument, as the cautery with fire is appropriate for good healing of these parts: this is the customary remedy for these parts, and the exclusion of the superfluous humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And thus care for those parts covered in hair or in which there is an underlying wound until the limb gets better, and also care for the wound so that the hardened flesh engulfs and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And so are the medicines in which there is styptic action and excision; when the time has passed, it is already healed and there is no fear of recurrence
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	May it be that if the fistula has already penetrated the belly of the cul and is elongated on the surface of the body, then enter with the thumb into the cul and inquire about it.</start_of_turn>
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if you seize the limb and enter between you and her, and it is very probable that it has penetrated, then it is not an operation for her but rather by way of trust and hope.</start_of_turn>
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of which is to administer in her three ways: either that you cauterize that immediately as we have said; or that you extract that which with your fingers restores the concavity of the limb so that you can easily enter the parts and the subsequent cure; and do not proceed without extracting because you may cause the ulcer to burst, and act with regard to the patient as you wish for the existence of the illness; or that you lengthen that immediately and say that pus which you extracted from within the cul, as we have said, or by means of another acute instrument, and modify those parts which are fistulaed, which are in the excision within which you must perform the crusting; and exert yourself to restore the whole wound by excision, and if the ulcerous pus does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the part of the cul, and if there is still pus in the ulcer, be more curious about the illness.</start_of_turn
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is ended in this way: when you insert your thumb into the fistula, at the waist of the cul surrounding the surface of the body at the hip and the flank of the cul, the thumb tries to perforate the extremity, which is like sewing the layers according to this method.</start_of_turn
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and enter into that tough covering of flesh or around those; and thus enter the thumb into the fistula until you restore the concavity of the limb.</start_of_turn
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	May it be that if it has penetrated the margin of the cul properly, then extract from that thread that is in the wound as soon as you have inserted the thumb into the cul; extract the extremity of the thread and join the two extremities even, and cover each with a bandage, and rest for a day or two, and when the thread has become soft in the flesh, renew that which is between two extremities of the thread and which cause them to adhere.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And thus care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	May it be that if the ulcer of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, but not in the belly, because that is not your concern, because you may cause the ulcer to burst; and thus do that which is necessary until it is healed.</start_of_turn
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spatum spinos in which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is not acute and the other part is not blunt, so that you do not cause anything unnecessary, even as sometimes.</start_of_turn
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Suturing of hemorrhoids in which runs sanctum at the incision of those.</start_of_turn
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, either those that remain in the rectum like charcoal, or those that are like clusters of grapes.</start_of_turn
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those there are small and large, and that the sanctum runs from those to the other, and is one, and is not in the belly, but in the extremities of the rectum.</start_of_turn
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	May it be that those which are outside the rectum are according to the measures of little humidity, of which run citrine water or a little of that continuous sanctum, and according to the color of the flesh.</start_of_turn
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is inside the abdomen is that the patient should be commanded to sit and express himself until the flesh heals and the hemorrhoids disappear from your sight.</start_of_turn
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you must lie down and suspend your hand over your head or that you have those things over your nail, and thus the cause of the problem will be known.</start_of_turn
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May it be that if your nails are not suitable for those things because of the humidity of them and their softening, then take those to the thumb and index finger and extract those from the belly of the wound, and thus insert those and sprinkle over them some powdered charcoal nearby the incision, so that it is applied to those instead of cauterizing; or cauterize those as it is said above.</start_of_turn
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And immediately treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the pain does not subside with evacuation, then criticize the patient for their scanty diet and wash them with the liquid in the pot that obeys evacuation obediently when the patient defecates.</end_of_turn>
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the erruptions are outside the bowels, their cause is slight, and it is that you take those with your nails, or that you take those with a sponge, and inscribe those, and immediately treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.</end_of_turn>
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever has suffered an incision, cover that you administer sutures according to this manner: take fine thread and pierce it through a needle, and then extract the abscesses from the parts above, and make that penetrate through the needle at the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread in the part below the needle, and stretch them laterally; and stretch the abscess with a strong structure, and immediately give him the thread and extract the needle.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do all this, and leave those ones alone and do not boil them, so that the surplus of the healing runs from that.</end_of_turn>
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And immediately place over the thighs a compress soaked in olive oil or beeswax; and place that over the body and command the patient to rest.</end_of_turn
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And immediately remove that within the box; and when it is urgent, treat those with ointment or with another treatment until they are healed.</end_of_turn
De curacio de fistulas.	Of fistula treatment.</end_of_turn>
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times these accidents occur by excessive opening of a wound or by constriction of nature.</end_of_turn
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since these are ancient and do not work in this medicine, cover those at the point of spurting or with your nail until they are moist and host those with the thick pus that comes out, which hinders those from solidifying; and immediately treat those until they are solidified.</end_of_turn
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And keep those things moist in a ratio more violent than the first time until the wound is healed and is scabbed; and immediately treat those until they are healed.</end_of_turn
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of boils, this is key.</end_of_turn
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	I say that blistering is key, and do not be surprised if you do not see it redon according to the color of the body resembling the head of a nail, and it is useful in all parts and especially in the lower parts of the feet and the buttocks, and because of these pains you must support them.</end_of_turn
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And immediately cover that which is in the circumference of the key, and hold it with forceps or with a sponge, and extirpate it from its root; and immediately treat that.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize according to what is said above in the groin.</end_of_turn
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a wart is a small, rough, round elevation on the surface of the body, and many appear in the most of the children.</end_of_turn
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for them is to stretch and inscribe them, or to open them up with thread or skin within the box.</end_of_turn
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.</end_of_turn
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are already eradicated forwards and backwards with the instrument which I said.</end_of_turn
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a bee is a small, fragrant or large fistula that appears on the surface of the body like a wound caused by a bee, and is useful around the body.</end>
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is to take a needle of ivy or of wormwood, and be strong, and place that over the bee until it is contained within the circle of the needle in the parts around it; and immediately rotate your hand with the needle until you have inscribed what is in the circumference of the bee, and stop that in the belly of the beast, and evacuate the bee from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do the same with a needle of hare or of iron according to this form:</end_of_turn
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part that comes out of the needle should be grasped by moisture, deaf (so it is not perforated), wrapped so that over the thumb the learning of the hand is ablated and the revolution of that.</end_of_turn>
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the bee as it is said above in the cauterization of other ailments in the groin.</end_of_turn
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of like manner as the instruments which are administered to give comfort.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some medicines are useful for giving comfort, such as silver or lead, powdered or malleated; others are useful from those small and large instruments according to those which are administered, for whoever is administered in the care of small children is small; and of those from whom the buttocks are rough or painful, their comfort is small.</end_of_turn>
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The way of giving great and little comfort:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle is detached from the thread in which it is bound, and be wide in this manner; and be distinguished by the place where the thread is bound thus as sometimes.</end_of_turn>
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the thread that is behind the buttock, which is entrapped in the buttock, be silent (so as not to be opened) more than a lion, hindering understanding; and on one side of the thread there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the breadth of the hole be according to the thickness of the rays and more thick a little.</end_of_turn
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the thread be in the which the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin are held, and the size of the thread be a palm.</end_of_turn>
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And be pierced by means of four holes thus as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes be the thickness of a finger.</end_of_turn
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes firm with firm thread, or throw those away; and adjust as you will to that thread; and when it is placed in it the thread, be straight in the head of the comfort between two distinguished men with strong constraint, and almost comfort that with each hole: More the quality of comfort is that you fill the bag with the medicine, that is scalded according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and take care that it is not too cold or too hot.</end_of_turn
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient be placed lying down on the seat, and elevate their limbs in their ease and pause; and place under them a cushion on which already lie men or a servant; and apply oil or album of oil or fat of hen or fennel seed or similar things to the extremity of the cautery. And insert that into the buttock with ease, and the minister grasps the bag and expresses that out two more and quickly until it is evacuated from the belly up to the very bottom of the comfort; and then remove the comfort and the patient takes their limbs to the wall.</end_of_turn
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to vomit, keep it for as long as possible; and if he sleeps with that for the whole night, it is better in the morning.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More if you comfort that in the ailments of the solution of the belly and the vomiting of it, the hours you do that the cautery will be healthy until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttock there are ulcers or bloody abscesses, the hours be the comfort soft and lion-like, like the comforts with which children are accustomed.</end_of_turn
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the care of wounds.</end_of_turn
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the care of wounds that which is convenient for the free, and I say the same of the care of those with hand and medicine according to the compliment.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are diversified according to what is the cause of the wounds and according to the place where the wounds are cast.</end_of_turn
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which some wounds are caused are in like manner as from stone, or incision of space or rib, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or similar to those.</end_of_turn
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More the wounds that are in the parts of the body are in like manner as a wound that falls on the head, or the shoulder, or the foot, or the belly, or the wrist, and similar to those of the members.</end_of_turn
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the care of certain wounds so that you stop that ratiocination and rule about the others.</end_of_turn
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.</end_of_turn
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when an accident happens in the head a simple wound and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is from stone or something similar, and if it has already drunk the codena only once and is a great wound and you fear that there will be vomiting because of the wound, cover the head quickly and apply pressure to the head as much as possible, and do not delay until; extract that from the sacred according to the quantity of the virtue of it if not more any prohibitive cause of vomiting, especially if the sacred that is extracted is little from the wound.</end_of_turn
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May be if there is a slight restriction from the beginning, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or strong drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the wound, if it happens to happen after the cautery, smear lard or wine on it where it is sticky.</end_turn>
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	May be if you are sure that the cautery has ceased, then pause on the wound, if it is recent and the air has not altered that powder which I would recommend to apply a little of.</end_turn>
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already altered that, then pause on the wound until it has healed.</end_turn
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	May be if the wound is great or is because of excessive space and swelling, and the lips of the wound are not adjusted for pupils, then adjust those as I recommend by suture according to what I recommend for the suture of them.</end_turn
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	May be if the wound is already uncovered from the bone and skin, and is not a retention but a small swelling, then prick that and apply medicines to the wound and restore the limb close to its proper place without tension, and command the patient to abstain from eating strong foods: eggs, sausage and fat until it is healed.</end_turn
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find pus in the cavity and it does not adhere to the bone, then prick all that is putrefying and evacuate it, and apply medicines to it.</end_turn
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	May be in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows freely, and which is not stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not bleeding, then prick that part, or ligate that; and if necessary, because of the pain you cause, that what we have said you should not do, you cauterize until the blood stops bleeding.</end_turn>
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is likely to be slight; thus if you powder over those things this powder, which has been consolidated while the air has changed those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil half a part, of blood one part, of vinegar two parts; let it all be ground and powdered, and let the wound be filled with it, and let it be tightly closed until it adheres, and let it be coagulated with the blood.</end_turn
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply that tightly to the wound and read that, and do not remove it until it has healed, for it is not recommended to remove it until the medicine has been applied until it has healed.</end_turn
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And every time make that alone which is to your benefit, when I am not present with you olive oil and blood.</end_turn
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And thus this medicine has been used in great wounds when it was considered that it should be interrupted over those and that they were stretched, and only for recent wounds where the blood has not been altered.</end_turn
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has already altered it, especially in summer, it is not understood concerning the position of this powder, but rather you should apply that which we have said, that is, if you stop over these abscesses with decoction, or that you stop over the grains of barley with water and honey until it has become reduced; and apply the other treatment along with this until they are healed.</end_turn
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	May be if the wound fractures the bone, and is small, then extract that with your hand.</end_turn
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the treatment for fractures of the head is in poison.</end_turn
De las plaguas del col.	The provided text does not include information regarding "plaguas del col", so I am unable to translate that portion.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	May be if the wound occurs in the heel, there is no difference in treatment between that and a simple wound of the head.</end_turn
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	May be if the nerves of the heel are cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in its healing but that it should be avoided treatment of it with that which makes violent constriction, just as with zinc and sage which is old and resembles them because it does not cause the nerves to swell and relieves that.</end_turn
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause on any cause of great cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of them is at the brain, which is the most important of all the members.</end_turn
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is necessary to treat it with medicines that are light, even like washing with lukewarm water, any vegetable matter boiled in olive oil or not, and then when washed with lukewarm water and the other stones that are not harmful according to this manner, and heat.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	When the plague is great, administer sutures, or bind the lips tightly, and then care for the swelling that remains until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	When the plague is profound or severe in the lower parts, the doctor will perforate it in the most depressed area
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	When an artery has already been cut in the plague and blood flow has stopped, the doctor will separate or dry that area, or ligate that area, or cauterize that area if necessary to prevent further bleeding
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	When the vertebrae of the groin or all of them have already been cut, and the veins of the belly have been preserved, the doctor will adjust the lips of the belly with sutures over the edge of the groin and do not touch that; elevate that and reduce that to its natural position, and then strengthen that by stretching downwards, and rest that for several days; and care for that which is in the bowels where there is stickiness and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	When the plague has already caused great damage to the bones, the doctor will pierce that; and if there are fragments of bone, remove them all; and what is not injured, rest that until the plague has subsided, and let the discharge of that be alleviated
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, the doctor will sprinkle powder over that powder which has been recommended
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	When there is a fistula in the plague, the doctor will care for that as soon as it comes to his mind in the capital city.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the belly or of similar things when there is pain between the buttocks and it is painful at the space or at the shoulder or at the hip or at the thigh.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of the hip or of the shoulder, and sometimes of the groin, and sometimes of the depth of it, the doctor considers more if there is excessive wind in the patient; the doctor knows that the plague is mortal
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is not depth and the plague is recent at the edge of the wound, the doctor will stop there for the first hour with powder, and do not strengthen that because it will not retain the blood in the depth of the wound and will return to its course and aggravate the disease, more than stopping it there attracts, and remove those two veins that give the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the vomit is not at your present, the doctor will pause at the orifice of the plague because of the humors; and make the patient sleep over the plague so that it runs off what is in it adjusted
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	When already from the plague three days have passed or more and the patient does not have spasms or trembling of the body or stiffening of the bowels, and sometimes other good signs of the patient, the doctor knows that the plague is saved; and then care for that as for calamine and another care until it is healed
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	When the healing of the wound is excused, and has already passed a long time, the doctor knows that there is already a fistula; care for that for the capital city
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is for incision of the space or of the shoulder, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the thigh, the doctor will care for that with a suture if it is great, or with powder if it is small
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	When already great damage has been caused to the bones, and only a few fragments remain, the doctor will turn the plague and cover to extract those fragments, if they are separated
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	When they are not separated, the doctor will rest them until the plague subsides, because the extraction of them is alleviated
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And as for the other plagues that happen in the other limbs, the help in their care is the help of what has been said above.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that happens in the belly is either great, or little, or moderate
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great many veins there are the blood vessels of the belly, because it is the suture of them to be more violent and more subtle
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A slight rupture is difficult by another method, and if it is so, if you do not guard against the intrusion of them into the cavity of the body, it will open up and swell because the substance of them is already spoiled.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore the best rupture is moderate, because in that one the reduction of the belly is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two preceding ones.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	The suture of the belly is done in four ways, more commonly two sutures are common than in the sutures of the other parts of the body
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other sutures similar to these connect the other wounds, but in the suture of the belly they are more specific.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you that you make any necessary exposure and declaration.</end_of_turn>
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is any cause of the intestine remaining outside, and it is difficult to reduce it, then there are two methods: either because of the small size of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is inflamed by the cold air.</end_of_turn>
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when it is like this, you must cover that area with a sponge soaked in warm water, or that you compress it with water squinance, and cypress, and pepper, and cloves, until the inflammation is resolved.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And many doctors make it so that the vinegar is in the vinegar in which it has been steeped, and it is better than simply with water in resolving the inflammation.</end_of_turn>
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation has been resolved, then you must moisten the intestine with water in which it is contained, so that because of this the contents of it are alleviated with little cause.</end_of_turn
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	However, if the intestines are not evacuated immediately, you must make an incision with a small instrument with which are incised the sores.</end_of_turn
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is better when it is appropriate and does not cause excessive drying, and is not necessary to dry it immediately.</end_of_turn
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, dry its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part is acute, and the other not acute, and the extremity blunt, and do not be like the shape of a spatula, advancing neither obtusely a little.</end_of_turn
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is outside, then you must cover that the reduction is according to its natural shape, in the place where it is proper, if possible over the wound, because it is better.</end_of_turn
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	However, when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on his two sides, and suspend your limbs above the navel; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, you must suspend the head and the limbs above the chest.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you must suspend your attention and your thought for a moment so that the part in which the wound is located is higher than the other.</end_of_turn
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so you must administer water in the large wounds and in the small wounds.</end_of_turn
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small wounds, suspend water until it is ready, and make sure that it is administered between your greatest pressures, which has the disruption whole with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and immediately uncover from this to that which if it should happen to close any cause of this other.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture method: that you grasp the needle, or the needle handle according to the size of the wound; and immediately grasp from the tip of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the needle one, or more that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the codena, at the two extremities of the scaphoid that is left by the codena of the parts that are downwards, until you have pierced that part; and you have already added two extremities of the codena and two extremities of the scaphoid, so there are four orders in total.</end_of_turn
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And tighten firmly twice around the circuit of the needle, and several threads of two parts together, and immediately add the two lips and the wound together by adding downwards; and immediately withdraw the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that place, and immediately bind that as firmly as the first needle; and do not stop until you have completed the contraction of the wound.</end_of_turn
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the fine needles between thickness and bluntness, because the fine needles do not bite cruelly; and the thick ones are difficult to handle in the codena, and therefore because of this you must make them move in bluntness and thickness.</end_of_turn
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not make the needle stay in two extremities of the codena too much, for so the flesh is not bitten cruelly and the wound is healed before its consolidation.</end_of_turn
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the suture too much so that the wound is not prohibited from consolidation.</end_of_turn>
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And immediately after piercing the extremities of the needles so that it does not cause the patient to shiver; and you will pause on the suture of pulpy expansions of every part, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound is already consolidated.</end_of_turn
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These kinds of sutures with needles in the palm of the hand are more convenient in small wounds, where there is only need for one needle or two, or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture should be done cautiously: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, from the shoulder and two extremities of the forearm, in a bundle, with a needle in which there is reliable envelopment of the tissue in smoothness and size.</end_of_turn>
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has pierced these four extremities, reduce the needle of that middle part from which you began, so that the faithful thread retracts somewhat from the part that hangs up on the wound, so that the suture is as strong as the other that is made with the thread with which they are dressed.</end_of_turn>
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the middle finger.</end_turn>
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture saves the lives.</end_turn>
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And thus I sutured the wound which was caused to a man in the navel who was stung by a wasp, and it was the disruption of the greatest wound of a palm, and it was ejected from between two palms of the heel and was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and when I had reduced that which had been outside the wound for xxx hours.</end_turn>
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and it was cured; and thus I saw that for a month, and it was reported to me afterwards.</end_turn
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it would not be cured; and by a miracle, behold, it was cured, for in that place where no other remedy had been found or medicine, I simply put a compress over the wound every two days and I bathed it diligently with honey water until it healed.</end_turn
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I say two kinds of sutures that are proper according to the narration of Paraula.</end_turn
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the shoulder, and you enter the needle from the back to the front.</end_turn
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates the shoulder and in that middle laceration according to the rule and in length throughout the body, and leave the forearm in which you have introduced the needle; and make penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back to the front in the other extremity of the limb.</end_turn
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus when you have finished that penetration, then make another penetration in that same middle part of the limb from the back to the front; and leave the forearm which is in that laceration, and make penetrate the needle in the other extremity from the back to the front.</end_turn
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And thus make penetrate in that way that the one that you make in the forearm at the level of the wrist where all those penetrate.</end_turn
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And thus begin from this middle side and grasp that which is the forearm in the other side, and extract the needle from the shoulder which penetrates, and then reduce that in that shoulder and close the forearm which is in the other side to this extremity; and extract that from the shoulder which is of the side of the thighs.</end_turn
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And thus make one turn and another, and make one turn almost another turn until you have closed all that which is outside according to that example.</end_turn
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of stitching is that you close with a suture of hair with which you close the skin, in such a way that you close the forearm one turn from the part of the wrist, and that you leave that other turn until it is completed.</end_turn
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of suture which I say openly is Gualia, and this is of such nature that it is recommended that you close that according to the manner in which many doctors close that, in such a way that you add all the parts to their proper parts; and apply the forearm of one to the other of the thighs, and that which is done is right according to what I recommend to you.</end_turn
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Because you must keep the needle in the forearm at your will from the part of the front, and make that penetrate to the part of the back in that hole, and leave two forearms; and then turn the needle and make that penetrate from front to back in two forearms of the limb.</end_turn
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And thus turn those parts, and make penetrate whatever of the back parts into the front part in two extremities of the limb other than those which are in the side.</end_turn
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of stitching is better than the common suture of the leg, and is a suture of which there is precedent.</end_turn>
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And thus I say to you, the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so that you enter into these with any thread, and begin with the inside needle from that which is due to you, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those which cause the body to swell.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.</end_of_turn
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	Moreover, the judgment of the plague is the judgment of the other plagues.</end_of_turn>
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you recognize the recent plague on the skin, then the air alters that, and reduces the swelling and boils of that, and makes that descend adequately, then you stop over that dusty powder.</end_of_turn
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then you stop over that ulcer until those which are at your presence enter within that it makes the skin hard and black, and that consolidates; and you watch over it like that; and you care for that just as for the care of the other plagues until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	Moreover, if you are not present with the medicines, then you stop over that immediately, because it begins to vomit bile, cough violently, and exchange two meals a day, just as you and I teach, until it is healed, for you do not take any other medicine in large quantities when the plagues are simple.</end_of_turn
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Moreover, if you fear that the plague communicates by wound to the principal members, then you cover that you immerse linen soaked in oil of lavender of good quality, or in rosemary oil, and stop that in the circuit of the places that are between the armpits and leave the armpits open.</end_of_turn
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the swellings, that many meals have been vomited, then you crush that with black vinegar which you should give to him, especially if the swelling has been reached in the belly and is clearly useful for the evacuation penetrating into the curvature of it.</end_of_turn
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that that which is of the big belly is easier to heal than that which is in the small belly.</end_of_turn
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing that which is called “gegunu” which does not receive healing from the plague that remains in it of all; and that is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and for the greatness of it that is in those, and for the subtlety of the body of that, and for its proximity to nature of nerves.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Moreover, if what proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you have recently recognized it, reduce that according to your precept which you reduce the swellings of the body.</end_of_turn
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Moreover, if it has passed to the space and it is already green or black, then you strengthen that with a needle over the place that is degraded of it, so that comes out flow of health, for there are veins and arteries in the cloth.</end_of_turn
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And thus it is said that another ligament is necessary, and you stop two extremities of the thread pending the part left of the plague outside, so that on your part there is relieved the attraction of it from the body and the emission of the bile of the plague.</end_of_turn
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the plagues when they happened in the belly.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the belly and it is slight, it is possible that it remains contained in the ulcer homes, to help so that you see that which was previously sick in the belly with percussion of the palm and which was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was old and had become fistula, and evisceration of it with wind.</end_of_turn
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And thus I proceed with the care of it even if it is not confident in the healing of it, but I cease to subtilize it until it is healed and the place is consolidated.</end>
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I must say that when you see the place already consolidated, time passes over the sickness that you remember having happened in the belly; and do not remember anything for that which happened and remain in your many things doing and eating, and approach in bath and exercise in your words.</end_of_turn
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And I say that those who have experienced it say that when the plague is in the belly, and it is slight, it must be bound in this manner: that you take large grains of barley; and that you adjust the two lips of the plague and stop a barley from those which are above the two lips of the plague; therefore when you take over those and stretch your mouth, you burst the head of it, which adheres and is not dissolved.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And immediately stop another bleeding from the first one, and do not cease until bleeding has stopped throughout the entirety of the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And immediately reduce the swelling with the wound closed; and keep those extremities attached in the belly until the swelling has subsided; and do not cause any damage to the patient during the process.</end_of_turn>
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is already possible that the swelling is attached to the surrounding flesh, which is caused by the swelling of the beast's belly attached to it; because it is more pointed; and that you grasp the extremity of these veins of the belly, and do not dissect it, and immediately bind the extremity to it with gutta and thread, and encase the thread in needles and cos it up again to that swelling.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This way of stitching with bleeding is nothing but by faith and hope.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Even if the wound is large and wide, most of all if it is in a delicate toe, the time is not to be hasty but to be skillful, and not to heal it entirely.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Care for wounds and fistula.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Be aware that all wound and swelling when they age become ulcers, and it is called a fistula when it is not consolidated and does not break down, whatever the part of the body it is in.</end_of_turn
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a foul, hard, white swelling which does not cause pain and which is concave like the swelling of a wound of punishment; and for this reason it is named after that punishment, that is, wound.</end_of_turn
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in a wet wound that the swelling breaks down; and when the humidity is strong, it is expelled in a few hours.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And many plants have this humidity, it is little, it is great, and it is subtle.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And indeed I have already said in the division that all ulcers which are not healed or which are not in their natural state, are not other than for one of these reasons: either because of a lack of care in the body; or because of malice in them; or because there is hard flesh between them and the lips which prohibits the birth of flesh; or because of moisture; or because of bad quality matter which is transmitted to them; or because the medicine is inappropriate for the treatment of them; or when corruption occurs in the region, and is pestilence; or because of the nature of the region itself, as in Saragossa for example, in which it is difficult to digest diseases and which delays the healing of swelling.</end_of_turn
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Indeed, all those causes have been shown, and the treatment of them with medicines has been mentioned in the division.</end_of_turn
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so I inform you of the treatment of fistula which is effective by surgical means with the hand.</end_of_turn
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for example, fistulas which run through great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the belly, or the testicles, or in any of the vertebrae, or in any of the compound joints such as the hand and foot; and those which give proximity to the main limb and its vicinity.</end_of_turn
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, of all these fistulas, which are treated in this way, some are those of difficult healing, and do not receive care, and are accompanied by work and ignorance.</end_of_turn
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is of any fistula the depth of which does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you hope and trust in the treatment of them, and you wish to learn about them, when you wish to remove or cut them out, and if the fistula goes according to rule, inquire about that from me.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is tortuous, however, investigate that which is under the skin, for the swelling of the body is alleviated and curved over the tortuousness.</end_of_turn
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has no very horrifying motion, it is not in your power to signify about it when you attempt to do so.</end_of_turn
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore glorify the Lord for his works, for the humidity for which you glorify him goes away from the other works and comes from them.</end_of_turn
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And immediately inquire thoroughly, according to what manner you are able, if here you have bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is long or short, or if it is one to which there is more than one orifice and this is over all that you can do with the sum of your strength, with your wisdom, with which you diagnose the disease, with which you comfort the patient, and the invention of pain due to your compression with the hand over the area, and the resemblance of the signs and the causes of the swelling.</end_of_turn
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have completed all these preparations, look at the patient steadily and carefully consider whether the pain is due to an apparent fistula close to the joint, or far from the joint, or to a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any other part of the body which you suspect may be the source of the pain.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Look carefully at the fistula as described in the history, and keep that which is in the filtration and putrefaction of the carnation, and that which is born in the orifice of the limb, or in bone and marrow, and cure that which is necessary until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and is according to custom, keep the area surrounding the fistula as wide as possible, and remove all the corrupt flesh; and administer cold compresses with acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula which you have outlined with iron.</end_of_turn>
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this until all the decayed matter within the cavity of the fistula has been consumed by the acute medicine.</end_of_turn
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And finally restore the parts which were opened to their natural position when the fistula has healed.</end_of_turn>
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it has not healed by this means, you cauterize it as we have recommended.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone, and you suspect this, certify that it is so, and dry it up as we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or major limb as we have said.</end_of_turn
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and is in any corruption and blackness, burn away that which is rotten; and cure that which remains until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and is festering like this, know that you have not reached the root of the corruption; and now you must uncover it further and consider the cause of the pain and the strengthening of the surrounding area, and restore that.</end_of_turn
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And thus if it is healed, well and good; but if not, know that the corruption is in the profound depths of the body, which has not been reached, and do not attempt anything which may aggravate that.</end_of_turn
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bone is slightly corrupted, or if you are able to remove it, do so with fine forceps as seem suitable.</end_of_turn
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is a large bone, carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause of weakness in your strength.</end_of_turn>
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If there is any cause of the moisture, and in the beginning there is no fear or error, cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present here, and remove the bones.</end_of_turn
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, pause upon the wound so that the wound does not grow worse; leave that which is around the bones of flesh and ligaments, and keep the wound from being consolidated, and support the section which you have incised in your operation.</end_of_turn
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Hence, if you fear it, pause upon the wound covered in boiled broth with oil, or upon Egyptian unguent, or in some other soothing ointment, for when these have softened the ligaments, and the bones are separated from their sockets, and the tension is relieved.</end_of_turn
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone, such as a limb or a socket or the like, and that only the front part is corrupted, burn away that only as far as necessary until the blackness and corruption are gone, and then restore the wound.</end_of_turn
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the corruption is great and has already reached the marrow of the bone, it is necessary to close all that has been incised and to prevent the corruption from spreading further, and cure that which remains until it is consolidated.</end_of_turn
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you seek the advice of a skilled man in his home so that he may stay with you and help you with your operation.</end_of_turn>
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	For example, a young man who is about xxx years of age, who has recently experienced pain in his heel, and from which matter has flowed out from his foot into his knee, and which matter has spread to his heel, is a case of apostematous inflammation, not of external cause.</end_of_turn
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And thus the time should be extended in which the doctors are making their mistake until the apostemata has subsided, and care should be taken of the morbid matter, and the healing should be delayed until the fistula has formed, and all the bones and cartilages which have become loosened should be reduced and the humors of the body should be evacuated.</end_of_turn
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	The physician observed a multitude of doctors surrounding the patient for two years, but did not notice any of them until he himself was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	He observed their movements and the matters that flowed from their bodies from those orifices towards the great bones; and already the color of that man was pale and his complexion was yellow
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I intervened with a hook to one of those orifices and grasped the limb with the hook.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And I immediately saw and inspected all the orifices and found them to be open throughout the limb
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I closed my hand over it and pierced one of those orifices until I saw a part of the bone break, and I stopped there, for it was already dead and corrupted, and the part of the limb that had penetrated was already corrupt; and it was already corrupt from the inside out
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I followed what I had been taught and prepared from the bone that was uncovered
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I judged that it was not in the bone but in that corruption which had escaped and I followed it, and I had already driven it out.</start_of_turn>
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I stopped the restoration of the wound with medical consolidatives for a long time, and it is not consolidated.</start_of_turn>
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated it and discovered a second time on the bone as before, and I found that corruption continued in the bone.</start_of_turn
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I saw that from that corruption appeared, and I immediately performed the cure and restoration, and it is not restored.</start_of_turn>
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I found out about it again and I did not stop but I gradually pierced the small parts of the limb piecemeal until I perforated the restoration of the limb, and it is not restored until I pierced it around a palm of the limb, and I extracted that with the bone marrow, and then I restored it with medicine, and it is consolidated firmly and healthily.</start_of_turn
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	No further intervention is necessary in the operation of the limb and its section, but for the arrangement of the humors of the limb and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, which is in all hours for excess of evacuation without undue discomfort.</start_of_turn
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore health is for entire healing, and nothing is like the hardness of the bones; and it is a good thing to dispose of them in their legitimate place and restore their virtue; and it is enough for their disposal and they do not cause them to stumble or suffer in any way.</start_of_turn
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If it is prominent in the limb already brought to the surface, the hour covers that you should take ligament and strengthen that at the end of that prominent limb, and command someone to extend that limb outwards; and pull that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then bind that over the bone that you leave behind the limb, and stretch the limb outwards so that you break the bone in its parts, and then uncover the bone over the place where you want to close it so that the saw does not burn the bone.</start_of_turn
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And stop immediately or table for a while so that when you do that the saw does not cut the corrupted bone.</start_of_turn
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And that the sawing be gradual over the corrupted part, for if it is in the cavity of the bone corruption does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, and forces the closing of it again.</start_of_turn
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, bring forward a continuous part with the other, and the corruption is at the middle or in part of it, the hour you uncover the bone throughout; and immediately stop bleeding, and immediately saw that which is in the first part where the corruption is, until the closing of the other part is completed.</start_of_turn
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.</start_of_turn
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, pierce that corrupted joint and saw the bones that are continued from the other side.</start_of_turn
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, the hour is not in proportion to them but is cunning.</start_of_turn
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is not easy; however, cover that the corruption appears to you, and open that, and tell us how you want to manage it, and in what way it is possible for you, and in every way make it right to you, when it does not cause you to stumble or damage veins or nerves.</start_of_turn
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what is incisions and what saws to use for incisions of these bones are not always according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the fineness and greatness and smallness of those, and the hardness and rarity of those; for it is necessary that you prepare for every kind of operation the appropriate instruments for that operation.</start_of_turn
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation signifies for you the nature of the instrument from which you will indige; when you are great in study and long and know the methods of this art, and testimonies of the methods of diseases, which you have already had for your master in what is convenient for them from all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And thus I say to you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will perform as simples as those which you will perform at your prohibition, which you will experience about the others
Forma de serra:	This text refers to medical instruments and their uses in surgery, but the specific details and terminology are not clear due to the language barrier.
Forma de autra serra:	This text refers to medical instruments and their uses in surgery, but the specific details and terminology are not clear due to the language barrier
Forma de autra serra:	This text refers to medical instruments and their uses in surgery, but the specific details and terminology are not clear due to the language barrier.
Forma de autra serra gran:	This text refers to medical instruments and their uses in surgery, but the specific details and terminology are not clear due to the language barrier
Forma de ray:	This text refers to medical instruments and their uses in surgery, but the specific details and terminology are not clear due to the language barrier
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Both the head and the points of this instrument are shaped like a star with claws, and the points are like those of a starfish
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not appropriate to join the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or when the large opening is wide open
Forma de razori major dels autres:	This text refers to a surgical instrument that is larger than the others
Forma de razori menor:	This text refers to a surgical instrument that is smaller than the others
Forma de razori lat:	This text refers to a surgical instrument that is broad like a razor
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	This text describes an instrument that is designed to grasp tissue in a curved fashion, with a wide base and fine tip, and to grasp tissue vertically by puncture.
Forma de lu:	This text provides a description of the instrument's shape, but the specific details are not clear due to the language barrier
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	This text describes a razor-like instrument with a concave surface
Forma de razori autra subtil:	This text describes a subtle or delicate razor-like instrument
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	This text describes a razor-like instrument with curved extremities
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	This text describes a small, tentacle-like razor-like instrument
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	This text describes an instrument that is used to cut bones, such as an awl or osteotome
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	This text describes a smaller variant of the previous instrument for cutting bones
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	This text describes an instrument that resembles a ray, with a serrated edge, and is used for cutting bones in various locations
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	This text describes an instrument that is suitable for perforating bones, such as a drill bit
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and acute-tipped
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and resembles all the causes that we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	From the incision of the extremities to the closing of the bones
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are sometimes damaged either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic one, or when you have treated that corruption for the care of those medicines and the care does not relieve it, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the limb without you having inflicted any cause, and in that case you must suture that limb as soon as possible to prevent the disease from spreading due to death or malice, which is a greater defect of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign that a limb is black is that it turns black before it is healed, or that the blackness approaches close to the root of the limb before it is reduced, so that it seems to blacken the limb itself and all its parts; therefore you must know that the limb is already dead in that case
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a venomous blow, such as from a scorpion or a viper or from a bite of a spider or from something similar
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or the blow is at the end of the finger, then you must suture the finger and do not allow the corruption to spread to the hand
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if you reach the hand, then you must suture that from the root of the nail, and do not allow the corruption to spread until it is reduced to the root of the arm
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you see that, then you must suture the arm at the crease of the joint
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another one comes, the corruption sometimes passes around the crease, which is the death of the disease; and to administer another cause along with the treatment is not of any use
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the foot, the doctor should puncture the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Or if you see that it has penetrated to the bone, the doctor should puncture the area around the joint of the bone.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the bone, it is not useful to do anything but let the patient die naturally
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The manner of puncturing the limb or closing it is that you grasp the ligament behind which you wish to puncture, and grasp another ligament over the joint; and extend the minister one ligament towards the lower parts, and extend the minister another ligament towards the upper parts; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments at a space greater than a palm's breadth until the whole flesh is revealed; and then you either puncture or cut
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And that you keep the hand of all parts still so that it does not touch the joint, and that the patient receives a slight wound and some ointment after the cautery
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Or if blood flows forth during the work, the doctor should cauterize the area surrounding the wound, or suspend their works until the blood vessels are narrowed; and then return to their medication once the bleeding has ceased
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected limb with a ligament as desired, and care for that which is within until it is healed
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I urge you that you must take care of a man in the sick foot, this means that you must look after this unfortunate man as I have recommended, as he has suffered from a burning in the sick foot like a fire in the air.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That corruption first appears in the marrow of the foot until it affects the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And when that man has prepared himself for himself more than when he went for the cure when he suffered from the pain and discomfort of the limb, and when the puncture has been made to the joint, and when the bone has healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time has passed since that medicine was applied to the foot which was the sign of the corruption
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I saw that it had passed away, and so I was astonished at the result of the medicine which I had placed on the hand of the physician; for it did not produce the result I had expected, but rather caused the malady to progress to the other foot before it had finished with the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And I was commanded to puncture the hand, and I did not dare to do what I had hoped would be the result of that superfluous remedy, for I feared that by puncturing the hand I would cause the patient's death, since the power of the disease was great.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he awoke from his sleep, I learned that that man had prepared himself and had cauterized his hand entirely, and that he was healed
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not recounted this story except to show what can be done in such a case, and to signify the reason for its being significant and useful to others who may be afflicted with the same disease
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	From care without wounds and the quality of care of physicians.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in a fleshy limb, the space of the abscess is prolonged until collection of pus is complete, and then it is ruptured and drained; the pus is discharged, and the wound remains open as if it were a vessel, and the surrounding tissue is pulled out as if it were a thin veil, and there is no further corruption, and it does not affect the bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called an abscess, and is not named fistula
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption precedes in some limb, it is called fistula and not an abscess
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment of such a wound is that you should puncture that membrane throughout as if it were a wound, and more so when it is thin and is like a membrane, and comfort yourself that it does not adhere to the location by its corruption
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	And if you hope that the membrane will adhere and that the corruption will not result in any further consequence, and if the membrane has become soft, the doctor should care for that which is in the cluster of pus
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you must consider the safety, and if the limb is large, and the hand which you are using is of such a foul odor, the doctor should cauterize that part with Egyptian medicine which is of olive oil and vinegar and saffron receiving parts of vinegar, and should be applied to the wound in a vessel, and should be covered over the fire until the medicine has solidified and become of use.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And now take what is necessary from the patient and dissolve it with vinegar and honey; then instill it into the wound, strengthen the orifice, and leave the medicine in for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And now extract what is superfluous; and make water for as many days as necessary until the wound is healed and the pain is gone
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And every bruise is cleansed with water of ashes, when it is not at your present disposal of this medicine; and you take the ashes of vinegar, and put them on it; and return that and cleanse it with that until you are confident that the wound will heal in an hour.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of the ashes, then cleanse with water and honey and add vinegar, and cleanse with wine and honey mixed, because honey has the property of softening and washing, and wine makes the wound adhere more, and especially when there is an excess of styptic and drying.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have made water of every bruise and you are confident that the wound has healed, then cleanse with water that causes the wound to swell
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take of fennel seed and dissolve it with that olive oil and wine styptic; or that you instill that with any other medicine that has the properties you have already read in the treatise of medicines
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the wound is narrow in which the catheter of the syringe cannot pass, then you must gradually widen that opening with a small needle, and place a bandage wrapped in Egyptian or balsamic ointment until it is widened
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And in the same way if the orifice is wide, then you must suture the edges of the wound and leave it as much as the amount of blood that comes out during the irrigation
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the wound from which blood flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lower part of the limb that is in the wound so that the limb flows downwards, because when the limb is compressed in the wound the flesh is squeezed out of it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the wound around the bone at the bottom as you wish, then you must perforate that you prepare the limb with the preparation for which the limb flows with great pleasure as you are accustomed and that it is not retained by any cause of the limb.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medicines that are applied to the convenient wound as long as you wish to extend them over the edge of the limb.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the limb should be of such great quantity that it makes communication of all the wound possible; and insert into the edge of the wound a little wider than the wound itself; and extend over another part of the limb the leeches as many as the quantity of the wound, and leave it on that for a long position of the wound so that it is relieved from the swelling of the limb and does not cause the limb to swell excessively except for about two days a wound
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May whoever is over the wound remain there for an hour in order that it may dry what has swollen in the limb.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And that you may know if the blood that comes from the limb is thick or thin, or is digested or not digested
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And take into consideration the place of that wound, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is swollen
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that has adhered to the edge of the wound has already adhered, or has proper adhesion, then you must remove the dressing or change the dressing, and when you remove the dressing, change the bandage.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	However much there may be nearby of the wound with subtle humors, do not despair of the adhesion of the wound, for the healing of the wound is proper, for in those in which the generation of flesh in the wounds is delayed, and in those in which it is useful to oppose it
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the limb has been swollen for several days without recovering, then you must know that the wound does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the limb is delayed and is the cause of the prolongation, then you must adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humified in their substance and in their virtue, they are as dry as fennel seed when it is adjusted with excessive addition of vinegar
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And finally, when the wound is healed, take fennel seed and dissolve it in olive oil, and let it be poured over wine vinegar in its substance, and mix that with that, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And thus it is done in that action, when not with a limb, with fennel seed, honey when it is cold, use of that; or take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind all of them and powder over the honey when it is lukewarm, and pour liquid over the bandage and strengthen that over the wound; and pour that liquid over the wound when it is cold, and powder over the bandage and strengthen that
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Each vegetable is administered with long-handled forceps and reason from celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) and barley flour and centaury, and use these simples or adjusted, crush these and sprinkle over honey which I have recommended; and use of these.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If prolonged, and it is not healthy for this treatment, it is said that the corruption is in the belly, and already inquiry is made in the bones or in the other solid members or ligaments; the hour you must treat with fistular treatment, as is said.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Treatment of swelling of the joints and nails, attraction and incision of the finger added and section.</end_of_turn>
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Swelling is a swelling that does not leave the nail of the finger outside the palm of the hand or the foot, and is strong in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its treatment is less valuable, or is a swelling of a swelling caused by cautery, or is corrupt, and pus is secreted until it corrupts the root of the nail, and is strong that it corrupts the whole, and is strong for its corruption to the bone until it is odoriferous, and is beneficial to cut off the extremity of the finger. The color of the swelling is beneficial.</end_of_turn
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, the hour you must insert all the superfluous that is removed from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound immediately adjacent to that, because the burn is not useful in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is soft and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail have already penetrated the flesh, and begin to swell, the hour you must pause and leave the angle of the nail that you have pierced the flesh, and push that back and pierce that again with the point, and place over that which remains of the flesh from the medicines that burn away the corrosive; and immediately treat that which remains until it is healthy.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already settled in the bone, the hour you must insert the bone and extract it, because at no time is it healthy that the bone be corrupt.</end_of_turn>
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corruption and the corruption go down the finger, the hour you must pierce that in one of the joints according to what is foreseen for its memory, and immediately treat that which remains until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail has percussion or adhesion, and there is acute pain, the hour you must at the beginning apply cold to the patient, and immediately dry the nail with rough sponges with transverse cuts, and keep that the cut does not reach the flesh that is left under the nail, because you will cause acute pain, and if you cause injury to the adjusted flesh in the place; and immediately treat that place where pain persists.</end_of_turn
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	The more adjusted it is, which is born from the most of the household, the more is it meaty all, and the more is it in the bones, or the more is it in the nail.</end_of_turn
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And these are born from the root of the joint, or is the birth of them in the bones of the fingers.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that is born in the bones of the finger does not spoil, and the one that is born in the joints is strong and spoils easily.</end_of_turn
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the section is light, and it is that you must insert that from which you must take the root with a blunt sponge.</end_of_turn
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	And of those that are born in the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult; and therefore keep that from the amputation of them.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in that which is born in the finger you must cut the nails, cover that at the beginning the flesh of them with an incision round about the bone, and immediately grasp with one of those convenient serras, and immediately treat that which remains until it is healthy.</end_of_turn
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	If consolidation occurs in the fingers between their bones due to the vegetable diet or by the birth of the child who did not give notice, or by consolidation of pus or by burning of fire, or by remaining silent, then cover that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And immediately stop between their layers of fat with olive oil so that they do not consolidate too much, and separate between those, or put between those a layer of soft lead until it is consolidated as much as necessary.</end_of_turn
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly if consolidation occurs in the bones of the palm, the hour you dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and convene to the shape of the limb.</end_of_turn
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the beginning of vice, so are varices.</end_of_turn
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varices, and these are veins that are wrapped around large veins filled with melencolic fluid that flow in the bones of the body, and their greatest advancement is in the limbs of travelers and laborers and porters.</end_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:
Forma de unci orp:	Forma de unci orp
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein originates in the buttocks as well as in Arabia and India, in dry and arid lands where there is little vegetation and little rain.</end_of_turn>
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	It is also found in other parts of the body, especially in the buttocks.</end_of_turn>
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	Its digestion is putrid, like that of serpents, worms, and beetles, which cause swelling between the bone and the flesh.</end_of_turn
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the approach of its arrival is that this vein causes violent inflammation in the buttock; and it is seen there; and from there the vein begins to rise from the place of that inflammation which seems to be cut off like a plant.</end_of_turn
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And thus when you see the limb, then cover the area with a plum whose weight is equal to two drachmas. Enter to two drachmas, and note that and leave the plum suspended from the limb.</end_of_turn>
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see it for any cause in the limbs, cover it with lead and do not remove it.</end_of_turn
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is not prolonged, remove a part of it and cover the rest; do not remove that which is contracted inwards, because if you remove that, it causes contraction and enters the flesh, causing swelling and ulceration of the flesh and pain.</end_of_turn
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For it must be treated with gentleness and gradually extracted, until it is expelled from the buttock and no residue remains in the body.</end_of_turn>
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein is said to be in abundance in the homes of the wealthy, who are from five palms to twelve palms in length, and I have already known one that was twenty palms long.</end_of_turn
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is extracted at the time of its treatment, put the point into the groin of the limb and perforate that along the limb to the flesh, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefying medicines to the area for several days along with medicines; and take care of the wound for the healing of abscesses.</end_of_turn
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein has many veins, especially when it appears at the ankle or in the foot, and it causes swelling in it, and is said to be from some vein which is split.</end_of_turn
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore take care of it as we have said in the division and as regards what has been said above.</end_of_turn
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the incision above the worms generated under the skin and is called bovine dropsy.</end_of_turn>
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in every land bovine dropsy because it is found in abundance among the rich and is little among the poor, and is seen throughout the body, causing swelling and debility, and is shown by the feeling of swelling in the limbs until the bone is fractured and the marrow is expelled.</end_of_turn
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	Its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors as well as from the bites of worms and serpents, and from the presence of worms and lice in the belly.</end_of_turn
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared for its malice, for when it enters the body and is raised to the head, it causes great pain, and that is why it is said that it breaks the head, and that is what causes the swelling of the limbs.</end_of_turn
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, do not do so without noticing its walking and appearing with the feeling, and when you have seen that the swelling has gone down and that there is relaxation of the limb and strong constriction of the flesh, and when you have dried it over the limb and extracted it.</end_of_turn
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is prolonged in the flesh and you do not remove it, put a cautery point over the area until it stays put, and the greatest cause of fear is the corruption of the marrow which causes corruption of the limb as we have said.</end_of_turn
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Or if sometimes it comes to the head close to the head, strengthen over the swelling with great firmness, and dry it over the limb, and extract it; and let the patient take purgatives to evacuate bad humors, and keep away from foods that generate putrefying substances.</end_of_turn
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the incision above the dropsy.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our land nafir, and it is a pain that is seen in several limbs, and is usually transferred from limb to limb.</end_of_turn
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And indeed, I have already witnessed such a case in which I recommended it.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I saw a small swelling on the funis vein of her arm, which disappeared after an hour, as if by magic, without any other cause.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then I applied pressure to that area and remained there for an hour.</end_of_turn>
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And I repeated the procedure on the other side until it reached the other arm.</end_of_turn>
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I recommended that she move her entire body as I had seen; and I was amazed at the change and the speed with which her limbs moved.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I had already heard of such things in my studies, but I have seen many who experience pain when their limbs are moved from one place to another.</end_of_turn
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen anything like that in women.</end_of_turn>
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	I do not know whether this has anything to do with the fact that the woman was old, as she had many old bones and exposed veins, and in such a state she must feel that violent movement.</end_of_turn
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that this not appear in those who are delicate and have humous-laden veins hidden under the skin.</end_of_turn
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	As for the treatment, and as the patient feels that pain, do not be afraid to touch her; rather strengthen your hand over that area and leave her feeling curious without doing harm until that violent movement subsides, and then cauterize the spot.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not see results immediately, do not be discouraged; at that time your treatment will be the expulsion of the humours and the reduction of the swelling, and sing these antiphlogistic pills and these of serapi, and similar ones.</end_of_turn
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.</end_of_turn>
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species and the parts of the body in which they are cast, for the diversity of them is that some have large heads and small points, and others have concave and blunt heads, so they are solid; and some have three angles, and others have tongues; and still others have shafts.</end_of_turn
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	The way in which these limbs or principal parts are affected when they are cast is in two ways: when the limbs are affected by the cause, as for example the brain, the heart, the spleen, the lungs, the bowels, the bladder, and the like; and therefore when one of these limbs is affected and you approach the danger of death, which I recommend that you avoid in those cases where death is imminent in the greatest degree, and when it does not appear to be imminent, and the arrow is not deeply embedded in the limb, then you extract the arrow and cure the wound.</end_of_turn
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And from the swelling of the belly is when the arrow penetrates it, and passes through the os, and is situated over the brain, which happens because of the violent heat, swelling, dizziness, vomiting in the head, and inflammation and vomiting of the tongue, spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and strong inclination to fainting and destruction of speech, and it is situated in the place of the wound a white moisture resembling wax, and its appearance is like the abundance of blood.</end_of_turn
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if you see this symptom, do not attempt to treat or extract the arrow, if not outside.</end_of_turn>
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	More often than not, when the arrow enters the heart, it is at the nipple on the left side, and is found to be in a solid cause, not a soft one; and the movement of the arrow is similar to that of an iron bar, and runs black blood, and if there is any coldness in the limbs, sweat, fainting; therefore understand that death approaches immediately.</end_of_turn
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the arrow has pierced the lung, it is accompanied by black spots of blood, and swelling of the blood vessels that are next to the gut, and changes the colour of the sickness, and expels great amounts of air, and requests an attraction of fresh air.</end_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	When the arrow enters the membrane that is in the foot, and the pain is great, it is from the small bones, and it causes great pain and difficulty in breathing, and does not allow the use of all the muscles.</end_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	When the arrow enters the stomach, it causes vomiting of any indigestible food.</end_of_turn
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the arrow is lodged in the belly and remains there, there will be any wound of the plague, or the cloth, or intestine which is ruptured, and no hope for its cure except for its extraction from the body.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the arrow lodges in the bladder and is expelled with urine, and proceeds from it any cause to the outer parts, and there is great pain in the abdomen, it is known that it is deadly
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Likewise with the face, the throat, the gullet, the spleen, the kidneys, the ribs, the collarbone, the shoulder blades, the arms and their joints, they are all saved according to the greatest precautions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not venomous
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I advise you concerning the matter of these arrows, for they signify concerning their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is that in a man who was hunting an arrow struck his eyebrow in the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the hair of his eyebrow, and he was healed, and it did not leave a mark on his nose ever since
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was hunting it on the hair of his eyebrow, I left the eyelid below, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be found except for a little bit that adhered to the eyebrow, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion’s head in which there were no hairs.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And thus is the Jew, and it did not leave a mark on his eyebrow at all accidentally
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who was shot in the gullet, and it was an Arabic arrow, and these are the ones that have hair; and when I came to pierce it between two ribs, it had already sunk into the Christian’s gullet; and when I came to take it out, I had to do so cautiously, and I extracted it, and the Christian was healed
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who was shot in the lower belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, when three days had passed and there was no improvement in his condition, I pierced the arrow and pulled it out, and he was healed, and it did not leave a mark on him accidentally
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had been shot in two places, and the plague was confirmed over him, and when I approached seven days later, I extracted the arrow from the root of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had been shot with an arrow in the lower belly, and the plague had settled in her, and it had not improved in her condition even after a long time, and the woman did not suffer any other serious illnesses.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who had been shot with an arrow in the face, and the plague had settled in him, and he removed the arrow without causing him any pain or discomfort whatsoever
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the prince of the king who had been shot in the middle of his nose, and it had already decreased somewhat, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to care for him shortly after the arrow was shot within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And when I arrived I saw that the plague of the arrow had not spread; and when I inquired about the cause of this I did not find it; however, I noticed that he still had some hair left on his eyebrow, and I hoped that this wound was caused by the tip of the arrow
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I put on the plaster on the area which has an astringent and digestive virtue, confident that the area will recover because I saw that the wound appeared to be caused by the arrow, which is drying up on that area
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant accident concerning the wound caused by the arrow; and I continued to keep the plaster on for several days, and there was no further accident; and the plague subsided during that time, and he recovered from the pain caused by the extraction of the arrow within a few days after the arrow had been removed from his nose and I confirmed that to him.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And I stopped the acute corrosive plague for several days until I saw an improvement in his condition; and when I saw that I took off the tip of the arrow which adhered to the head of the arrow
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And I used that medicine to combat the acute plague until I saw that the tip of the arrow became visible to me; and I left it like that for a certain amount of time, for about four months
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the plague had increased, I thought it would be possible to remove the arrows from it, and I left it like that, and I did not object to that; however, I continued to skillfully manage and administer treatment for it in various ways until one day I removed them according to the fashion of those in power in the capital, until I had extracted them; and I restored the patient to health after that
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The cartilage of the nose is not restored; I restore that, and the plague is consolidated; and thus is the patient healed of the disease, and it is not to be feared in him in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extracting some needles so that you can pause what is regular and significant about what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended either by the narration or by you.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans compare a little with the few who know little; and in what is present is what is absent; and they find a new operation and a new instrument that must descend from the causes external to the art when it happens by chance
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore I say that needles are not excluded from the limbs in which they are placed but according to two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they are entangled; or by the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is placed for the place where it is introduced, or is a needle proceeding from a fleshy place, is thrown out and excluded
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey these things at the time of the catz, the hour commands that you leave them lying for a few days until the surrounding flesh has decayed, and that the attraction of them and their egressio is relieved
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is pierced in bones and you do not obey them at this, the hour orders that you leave that one lying for a few days and repeat that until the attraction and movement in every day is over, and it is excluded
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey this thing for almost a whole day, the hour commands that you perforate in the circuit of the needle in that bone of the whole part with a slight tremor until the place is enlarged by the needle, and then extract that
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the needle is pierced in the bone of the head and has already gone through one of the bellies of the brain, and appears in the disease of those accidents that I have said, the hour abandons the extraction of the needle and leaves that until it is equal to almost a whole day; for if the needle persists in the head, the hour does not wish to prolong its death.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the needle is not pierced but only in the body of the bone and does not go into the marrow, and remains in the disease for almost a whole day, and no accident occurs to it from those accidents, the hour commands you to consider the attraction of the needle and the attraction of it
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if it is not pierced and you do not obey the extraction, the hour commands you to administer compresses in the circuit of the needle just as we have recommended, and take care of the place until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Maybe if the needle is already hidden in the body of the limb, and is hidden from the feeling, the hour commands you to inquire about that which you attempt, and if you sit that one, the hour pulls that which is convenient for the attraction of it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do that because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the period, and here neither bone nor nerve nor vein, the hour commands you to stay on the plague until it is amplified and until it is possible to extract the needle
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have doubts about which of these things you should do, the hour commands you to dissect the limb in which it is pierced throughout its entirety with all the skill that you can; and inquire about that, if you cannot do about the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the bones and in torsion of those until you obey
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the needle in any place, the hour commands you to use with your hand and forceps of all parts until you make that obey; and suggest that with your left hand you have great delicacy that the needle is not broken and that it is successfully extracted from you
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that of your hour, the hour commands you to leave it lying for almost a whole day until the parts that are in the circuit of it have decayed, and that you repeat that until the hour is relieved
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Maybe if you do the contrary of the flow of health, the hour commands you to administer what we have said of care in the head.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your prudence in the incision of a vein or a nerve, or a string, and administer skill in every way possible to facilitate the escape of the needle; and do that with such ease and tranquility and moderation as I and you have recommended
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore you must oppose the needle so that the disease is according to the figure according to which you must treat the case of the needle in it, for that is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Maybe if that is not possible for you, the hour commands you to administer what is possible for you according to the figures
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	The wound has gone beyond the normal limits of the other side, or already proceeds from one side to the other side, or causes swelling of the limb from the root up to the elbow; therefore you should draw back from that; and make the incision according to the quantity in which the forceps are grasped.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then draw the limb along the opposite side until the arrowhead touches the bone, and expand it further inwards, and then extract it.</end_of_turn>
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Or leave it for a few days, and then try to extract it again.</end_of_turn>
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the arrowhead is firmly fixed in that place, then pierce it through with your thumb.</end_of_turn
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Or if it is stubborn and you wish to give it another impulse, then insert your hand inside and, if it is silent, touch its concavity against the side of the arrow and then pierce it through with your thumb.</end_of_turn>
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Or if the arrow is curved, then pierce it through with your thumb from the inside outwards, because the arrow is relieved by that.</end_of_turn
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cover all the surrounding flesh with something, if possible, and then take care of the wound as you deem necessary.</end_of_turn>
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has penetrated the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough to do so, grasp the wound with your hand and, if possible, draw it out.  If it breaks, cover the wound with a bandage and keep your hand over the area to prevent any further bleeding or nerve damage.  Then extract the arrow and, if necessary, close the wound when it has healed.</end_of_turn>
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are grasped:</end_turn
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their handles are like the beak of an owl, which are useful when they grasp the arrow so that it does not slip.</end_turn
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And there are various kinds of forceps, large, small, medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.</end_of_turn
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Method of grasping the wound inwards like a claw of an owl to alleviate the tension of the arrow in it, and pushing inwards with that hand:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Method of pushing inwards with the hand.</end_turn
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like this to relieve the tension of the arrow inwards and push it inwards.</end_turn
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of venipuncture.</end_turn
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins from which we usually take blood for phlebotomy are usually...</end_turn of which there are sixteen in total.</end_turn There are two pulse veins that are close to the ankles, called the tibial veins; two veins that are in the two temples which are called the temporal veins; two veins that are in two holes of two nails which are called the lachrymal veins; a vein that is in the middle of the forehead; a vein that is at the end of the nose; two veins that are at the collarbone; two veins that are in the lips above; two veins that are in the lips below; and these are called the palpebral veins; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.</end_turn
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are punctured in the armpits are worth five.</end_turn And the cephalic vein, which is the armpit vein, is worth five because it is the mother of all the veins, and it is blind, and is called the “root vein”, and it is a medium-sized vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; and people call it the “trunk of the body”, and the basilica vein is the one that is stopped in the armpit, and is called the “cephalic vein of the armpit”, and the one that is on the forearm is called the “radial vein”, and it is stopped over the elbow, and this is the one that appears on the surface for a visible sign; and the brachial vein, which is between the thumb and the little finger, and there are two branches in it.</end_turn
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of them is the one that is below the curvature of the little bone of the armpit; and the second is the saphenous vein, the place of which is below the crease of the armpit; and the sciatic vein, the place of which is below the crease of the armpit; and in the leg there are other veins similar to these.</end_turn
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The nourishment of the veins that are close to the ankles is due to clots of ancient catarrh, emigration, saffosis and ulcers of the head, old evils.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And as for the quality of sleep you must know that it is related to the state of the patient: that is, that the head of the disease must be soft, and the head of the disease in the back of the head in the place where two veins are wide and well-frictioned; then strengthen the patient with a cushion between two points where the veins are close to the ankles in two places depressed from the head; and that is what I told you before, and if you sit on the side of those that I told you, here is the attempt.</end_of_turn>
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the pointed lance and that which is incidental, and introduce the vein into the codena until the blood comes out to the bone.</end_of_turn>
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then elevate your hand with the vein and the codena to the parts below and puncture the vein at the beginning of its incidence.</end_of_turn
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the puncture is the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and do it quickly as much as you want.</end_of_turn>
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with powder and leave that which is within until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of the treatment the puncture of those and their cauterization.</end_of_turn>
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two veins that are on the temples that help with the phlebotomy is ancient embolism and bad blood and habitual obstruction and acute swelling of the belly.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And as for the quality of performing those is that I recommend to you: constrain the patient with a cushion between two points where the two veins are visible at the moment when the feeling appears and demonstrate that you have understood their situation; and if you sit on the side of those that I have told you, here is the attempt.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then elevate the limb over the vein to the parts below as I have told you, and introduce the phlebotomy incision from the outside, and elevate the vein in its place; and puncture that just as you did with the other two veins; and do the treatment according to the quantity of your need.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then remove the bandage from the patient, and keep your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it over the wound and the powder and strengthen that below with great constriction, and leave that which is within until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the memory of those is recalled, and of those the puncture and the attraction at the beginning of the treatment.</end_of_turn
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the nourishment of the phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein to the ancient maladies of the face and to embolism, dropsy and fetid ulcers.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And as for the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that I recommend to you: that the patient tighten their limbs with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called fossori of which this is the form.</end_of_turn
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture when the tip of the fossori is on that vein and puncture it with a lean or other cause in the manner of those who do it; and let the blood run out according to the quantity you want; then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen that which is within until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Many veins are open with phlebotomy, however, the phlebotomy is not of acute extremity just like the others, but rather of remote extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the traverse, because the bone is proper and strong enough to withstand the phlebotomy when it is subtle.</end_of_turn
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More the nourishment of the two veins that are on the edges of two eyes for the scabies of the eyes for dropsy and swelling in the eyes, and to the maladies of the face.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient tighten their limb with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you stay standing over their head.</end_of_turn
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy is successful according to the traverse from a little distance to a little distance, because in that place it is not bone; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, the limb of that is fractured is fractured.</end_of_turn
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then do the treatment as you desire, and pause over those wounds, and strengthen those for a night, and then remove those.</end_of_turn
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is related to acute fever and violent sweating, and to the maladies of the face and embolism and dropsy that occur in the face, and especially when it is ancient.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the bleeding of the patient is that the patient stretches their tongue and approaches their nose with their left hand, and takes a moderate amount of blood from the middle of the nose following a direct line, so that the vein does not appear to be affected, and the blood flows freely.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Because you have finished bleeding the patient gradually and made the blood flow steadily, lie the patient down for a night, because that is how the bleeding will be restored pleasantly
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The greatest benefit of the bleeding of the two veins is to cause constriction of bile and commencement of leprosy and to abolish various diseases, such as measles, smallpox and corrosive ulcers, just as if by herpotromeno.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the bleeding of those veins is that the patient stretches out a little in their seat, and the physician should be placed over the head of the patient, and the patient should sit on a cushion
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform the bleeding of the vein gradually with moderate bleeding; and extract blood in a temperate quantity, or as many times as is necessary; and keep the other vein still
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then remove the ligature and tighten the two veins slightly to prevent excessive bleeding, and leave the patient for a while until the wound is healed
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The benefit of the bleeding of the veins is to relieve small boils and pimples of the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the throat
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the bleeding of those veins is that you will see the patient blush before you, and stretch their neck with a bandage, and turn their lips up, and touch two veins, one from the right lip and the other from the left; and the sign of each is for the blackness of each of both, and the more so in the circuit of those two veins there are many small black veins; and where any of them is seen to bleed, there is an opening there.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you are in doubt, leave it to me, and do not know which of those you should puncture; when you understand the situation you will learn to make the incision of the greatest of those, and the pus will manifest itself from those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And keep the two veins that are in the lips still.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is usually better to avoid puncturing the two veins that are in the lip rather than the one in the other lip
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are in the lip are of more benefit to the patient when the bleeding of the cephalic vein is performed for phlegmas that are in the gullet, for the disease of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of bleeding those is that the patient follows the pain between your hands before the sun goes down, and raises their tongue, and leave their tongue from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And when you have bled enough; and keep in mind that you should not finish the bleeding of those veins, for they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled in this place are commonly bled in all homes, and the bleeding of them is useful in two ways: either by making a superficial incision with a needle or by cautery with olive oil; or by scraping with a blunt needle, and this is the way to do it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is that you should proceed to section and of those very species of needles and subtleties according to the size of the veins and according to the stricture of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of superficial bleeding:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Like this with the needles as many times as needed, and proceed to open the blood vessels that are concave and full of apparent large blood clots, and to those that contain thick blood clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way of bleeding with olive oil
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This bleeding is of smaller latitude and of less violent extraction, and is suitable for the bleeding of subtle veins that contain thin blood clots
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The greatest benefit of the bleeding of the basilica vein is that it is one of the three veins that extract the blood from the gullet and the neck, and from which the feet and the belly are supplied.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the bleeders to take care, when they bleed that, that they keep hold of that and be over-calm in that, because if they err and prick in the puncture of the bleeding, they will injure that artery and cause the blood to flow, so that they must avoid doing that by cutting as little as possible.</end_of_turn>
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the swelling does not appear visibly, then it is necessary to lay the hand on one side and move it to the other, or to seek some limb that is stiff; or to cause vomiting at the end of the arm where the swelling is evident. Then remove the vomiting from the body in the same way as before.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform a venotomy of the limb, then before you tighten the bandage around the arm, place your hand over the area where the vein is to be cut; then grasp the vein with your hand and cut it with a curved incision as we have said; and hold your hand over the area to prevent bleeding.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you feel the stretching of the ligament, the swelling in the area that you have marked with your hand is due to an embolism of the artery, so avoid that.</start_of_turn>
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	When sometimes during the procedure of the venotomy, something like urine from a child comes out, this is an indication that the artery has burst; so stop and rest the hand for a long space; then tighten the hand again, and if the bleeding continues, the artery has been severed, so tighten the hand firmly and leave it like that.</start_of_turn>
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Take care of the patient's urine output, and remain calm about it, do not fear it for a few days until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the artery has not burst, and if you do not see any medicine at hand, then you must cut the vein yourself; because the limb is contracted and the artery is burst; or take a little bistoury, and do that, and take the hand that you are using to hold the vein and tighten it over the area of the cut vein until tomorrow.</start_of_turn
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the artery has burst, it is no use; but if not, then care for the wound from which the blood has flowed until it is remembered that the area where the blood vessels burst has recovered.</start_of_turn
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The cutting of the artery is difficult in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of injury to the ligament of the arm.</start_of_turn
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More importantly, the opening of the vein is useful for extracting the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of the brachial artery and the cephalic artery, as we have said.</start_of_turn
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	If you are afraid that there is too much tension during the process of the venotomy, because there is a nerve there; if you prick the vein too much and damage the nerve, it will cause paralysis, and the healing will be difficult, and will not be complete. If that nerve is hidden from sight in some people, and is subtle and not visible, then you must stop the venotomy at the point where you perceive that you have already cut the vein, and avoid the nerve as much as possible.</start_of_turn
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.</start_of_turn
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The usefulness of the cephalic vein puncture is that it extracts the blood from the head and relieves the suffering of the limbs.</start_of_turn
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	It is necessary to avoid in this way the puncture of the vein, whether with olive oil or with myrtle; because this is the only way to save all the veins, without damaging the artery or the nerve.</start_of_turn
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must know that when you make the incision of the vein you must take care that you do not prick the skin of the finger too much, and that you look for the most prominent point, and do not touch it, until you have made the first incision of the vein which is visible.</start_of_turn
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	It is often forgotten in some people, when it is not performed in the first incision, even though it is not noticeable afterwards.</start_of_turn
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the puncture of the vein and the accidents that may occur to it must be considered in order to rectify them.</start_of_turn
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	It is necessary to know that the puncture of the vein should only be carried out in cases where there is hope of saving life and health, and with caution to avoid any risk of complications, since it is useful for the vein that is in the armpit, that is: the cephalic, the brachial and the basilica, and that the puncture of the vein should be done at the beginning of spring, in the spring and in the autumn, and in the winter when there are signs of replenishment.</start_of_turn
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it is necessary that the puncture of the vein should not be repeated more than three days or one fourth of the day after sunrise.</start_of_turn
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When the puncture of the vein is administered, it must cause convenience and necessity, whether at night or during the day, in every hour and at all times.</start_of_turn
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be phlegmatic for any reason, cover the diseased bulges beforehand with a plaster of bees, if there is retained pus in them, so that the veins do not draw out the excess in the phlegm of the bulges, which are pressed, and do not swell the principal parts.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	They are not phlegmatic by nature, neither by drunkenness, or by eating too little or too much, or by bad air, or by excessive sweating, or by eating too much vinegar or drinking too much wine, or by eating fat or drinking cold water, or by excessive sexual pleasure, or by excessive work or sleeplessness, or by any other cause that dissolves virtue, or that makes the body weak or the animal sick
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider carefully the temperament of the humors in order to know if the patient is cured by food and drink, or by medicines if this is possible alongside them.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And take a bath if no other cause forbids, or exercise with any exercise so that the patient's temperament is calmed.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the phlegm of the feet in the third hour, as we have said above.</start_turn>
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	You must know that the feet of that patient must be guarded on that day in all accidents, whether animals or men, whether it is envy, wrath, fear, or any bodily accident, whether it is work, excessive food or drink, or other similar things to them.</start_turn
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And as for her, make present to her the causes which usually accompany men, such as aromaticness and odor, and fat and similar things, according to the amount of possibility.</start_turn
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlegmatique over a cushion that is thicker than the cushion of that which must be phlegmatique.</start_turn
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And draw out the limb, and wet that part with your hand twice or thrice; and then tighten the ligament with a cord and bind that twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the tempering must be temperate, neither too tight nor too loose, for if it is too tight, it prohibits the discharge of the healing; or if it is too loose, it weakens the body of the healing.</start_turn
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the tempering has been applied, cool the parts between their thighs until the veins are swollen, and declare it to the feeling.</start_turn
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And give the phlegmatique a a little oil of castor specifically; and then stop the limb with the thumb of your left hand over that vein, so that the vein escapes a little, and the percussion is calmed because the vein which is most affected by the phlegm is the one which escapes the most, and from those is that which is filled with air and when you stop the phlegm over that one it is contracted against the phlegm, and it is discerned by the phlegmatique; and the phlegm does not burst the vein, and if it bursts, that one is tight.</start_turn
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, for this reason the phlegmatique must be calmed and solicited in all these things.</start_turn
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And in case the vein should be burst in a moment, it is not good; but if so, repeat what you have done before and leave that place a little, or perform a festination there if the place is not swollen.</start_turn
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is swollen or the illness spreads, leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligament, for that will cause further swelling, nor take a bath.</start_turn
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Repeat the phlegm if necessary.</start_turn>
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the healing is proceeding well, and you fear that the quantity you wish will not suffice, then repeat the phlegm in that place according to the rule and adjust a little in the opening, and do what is called festination before the place is swollen, for the place is swollen in many people because of little opening.</start_turn
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Although sometimes that is swollen, do not repeat over it, for that is not useful to you for any reason; and leave on that part a little of the ointment of oil, which will relieve the body of the healing.</start_turn
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It is better in this location than oil and the others oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly administer oil externally throughout the inflammation, to which bleeding from the veins is forbidden by law, and make it turbid and slimy when one of them is applied to the area, because the inflammation is subtle and is reversed when it is thick.</end_of_turn>
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the area of the inflammation there is generated great swelling, which causes wounds to appear, especially in those that have not bled, or in the opening of the small vein, and when the area is pulsated, and you cover with sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scraped, and hold for an hour, because it is dissolved.</end_of_turn>
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that area with a bandage of sufficient size of the vein with the compliment of another vein.</end_of_turn
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you stay in the area for several days, any blackening or greenness does not matter; and if you wish, pause for any cause of pain and swelling dissolved, or any cause of urine of semen or of stool or similar to them.</end_of_turn
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And bleeding from wounds causes swelling and eminences due to inflammation of the basilica.</end_of_turn>
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on that area, and if you find them soft, put on your compression on that area, for that swelling is bad and harmful; and then keep that you do not put your hand on any cause of that which we have said, because blood flows strongly from the main vein.</end_of_turn
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply with oil that is styptic, so that the area is hardened, and then care for that which is left over until it is healed.</end_of_turn
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that you extract from the vein according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the vein remaining over the vein as much as it appears.</end_of_turn
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the vein is black, then you leave it to fester until it is cured; and in the same way if you see that it is thick, then you leave it to fester until it is subtle; and in the same way if it is acute, until the acute phase has passed.</end_of_turn
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And cover that which is full and strong and has need of extraction of a vein in a wound, that the inflammation of the vein is increased and that the bleeding is plentiful.</end_of_turn
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is frail, do the opposite of that, and cover that you extract in troops, and that the bleeding be direct.</end_of_turn
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best thing for inflammation of a vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.</end_of_turn>
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of lithotomy is saved from the flow of blood and from the injury of nerves, and is more harmless and more safe than lithotomy according to breadth and length.</end_of_turn
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is accustomed to occur without fainting, you must perform the lithotomy, and care for that before and after the lithotomy with a little bit of bread soaked in wine instead of a thousand grains or oximels simple scraped; and extract from the vein three or four times.</end_of_turn
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold congestion of the spleen, before performing the lithotomy prepare by infusing with an ointment of myrrh or with an ointment of fragrant honey with spices like cinnamon, ginger and the like, or with an aromatic and fragrant ointment.</end_of_turn
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs during the lithotomy, and is a cause of that the lack of blood, then cover that you must precede with drinking water of barley and fragrant ointment; and use of aromatic substances with some, and keep the legs bound to that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that have been said in the division of fainting for evacuation.</end_of_turn
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to happen the evacuation of the arms and dissolve the blood according to each time, cover that from which the lithotomy is for the movement of evacuation, and the virtue of which is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, so is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.</end_of_turn
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Whoever wants to happen the evacuation of the arms, and grasp the blood according to days, and the body is strong, then do that with almost seven or eight hours of the first lithotomy.</end_of_turn
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Whoever wants to throw out the blood of the body contrary to the part to which it declines, cover that it should be done on the second or third day.</end_of_turn
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Whoever in the body where there is no blood already clotted and is acute and causes fever, cover that you remove from it the blood in one blow and remove a great quantity of it and amplify the opening until fainting occurs, because you have preserved all the conditions of lithotomy; and that you place your hand over the area where the vein is to be lithotomized, because if you do not do that you will endanger life instead of fainting, for there are many who are ignorant and negligent in lithotomy.</end_of_turn>
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not cover when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the sacred according to custom, as the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to extract the sacred, so that you must surpass that malice and curve excessively, for that is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	There remains liquid inside that is fleumatose according to custom; or remain with the acuteness of the fleumatosis which is coagulation of the sacred in the orifice of the vein; or stop over that of mercury, or saffron, and compress that until the sacred is outside and settled
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is clotted, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the clot is dissolved
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the sacred according to custom, and it is not excused, then take hold of that on that limb or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called “funis of the arm” is fleumatized in the place of the lymph or of the fatty tissue, when not obstructed or hidden, for it is composed of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the fleumatization of them is that the disease brings its hand into cold water until the cavity is softened and the vein appears manifestly
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And do the same with that ligament and stricture of the middle; and fleumatize according to the small transverse, not latitudinally or along the length
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And the opening must be wide and your fleumatization must be of the kind that you fleumatize that above the junction of the hand a little bit
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the sacred is prohibited, then you iterate the hand in cold water and let the sacred run in the water until you achieve your need
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	More so if you are in the summer days, for in that case you are excused from iterating the hand in cold water, and the more is that the body of the sacred is kept in cold water in wintertime.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the fleumatization of this vein is more severe than all the others, for it has neither pulsating vein nor nerves
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the fleumatization of the cubital vein is related to the diseases of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the fleumatization of them is that you strengthen the hand with the ligament or with the hand itself, because you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is swollen and is shown at the same time; and do the same with the transverse; if you do not do this, it will not be cured in this way
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care not to touch your hand with the fleumatization, for you leave only the nerves of the fingers naked of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And do the same by iterating the hand in cold water and letting the sacred run in it, for if you do not iterate in cold water, the sacred will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the sacred is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you stop over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not solidified too much; and similarly cover that you may not leave any wound open
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	More useful is the fleumatization of the left hand, as it is related to the diseases of the heel.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same with the fleumatization of these as you have done in the other case.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The benefit of the cephalic vein in fleumatization is for the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, as well as diseases of the major veins, and retention of menses, and the diseases of the tonsils and ulcers of cavities and old wounds.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the fleumatization of them is that the disease brings the whole foot into cold water and makes it swell over that friction until the veins appear; and it ties over the ankle joint like a cord; and the place of the vein that appears must be indicated by the thumb, and from that so branch out on the face of the foot many veins that reach the knee
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore fleumatize the most extensive branch or leave the limb without its limb, because of the adhesion of the blood to the bone is better and more salt
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you fleumatize that on the face of the foot, then you must take care of the nerves that are left over that on the face of the foot, and stop your fleumatization with the one that you fleumatize across, as if you were going to puncture it
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And do so always.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	May it be permitted that I repeat the foot in the cold water and allow the sacred liquid to flow into that which must be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the physician errs in the first portion of the treatment, then repeat the cautery a a few times, because the place is salt; and fear not its malice, for it is better to guard the nerves as we have said.</end_of_turn>
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Likewise do the same with the other foot, equal measure.</end_of_turn>
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And as for the sciatic vein, the place we have mentioned must be grasped by the heel to leave the cavity of the hairy part.</end_of_turn
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the assistance of the cautery is to pull down the thigh when it is for the sacred cautery.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the cautery is that the patient between bouts of pain rests, and is relaxed and holds the limb from the waist down to the ankle with a long, narrow bandage that does not appear except for water.</end_of_turn
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, repeat the cautery according to the custom of each case and according to the situation, for it is better; or insert it by incision or remove it by excision, because the place is salt.</end_of_turn
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most homes not to be seen; and if you find it, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, repeat the cautery on some part of it, for that which appears in the two feet beyond the ear and the ankle.</end_of_turn
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Beware of the nerves, and allow the sacred liquid to flow in the quantity you wish.</end_of_turn
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the stricture and place your hand over the place of the cautery to strengthen the place, for curiosity is health.</end_of_turn
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From the breeze and the qualities of the vinegar.</end_of_turn>
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The winds are of corn, or of ivy, or of ivy leaves.</end_of_turn
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And the breeze is useful in two ways: one is by sacrifice and extraction of the sacred, and the other is by the breeze itself being a sacrifice.</end_of_turn
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this sacrifice that is by the breeze is in two ways, for either by fire or by fire.</end_of_turn
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the winds that are administered with sacrifice and extraction of the sacred are thirteen parts of the body, of which one is the nail of the thumb which is in the heel; and the two parts of the heel; and the two parts of the elbow; and the two parts of the wrist; and the two parts of the ankle; and two parts of the big toe; and two parts of the little toe.</end_of_turn
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the breeze does not extract the sacred except from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for this it does not take away its virtue, just as is the case with cautery; neither does it suffice that the breeze should be by fire or fire in any illness that is useful for replenishing until the whole body is evacuated.</end_of_turn
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	And if necessary, we will provoke the breeze for illness or for continuance, let us administer it at the beginning and at the end of the month, and in the middle of the month and at any time.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in some men the sacred is multiplied within them until they find difficulty in extracting it by the breeze and they find on their head a great weight and bitterness; and from these are those who find replenishment and solace in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and from these are those who find during their face and in their front brow obscurity and confusion and sleeplessness in their knees; and from these who discharge the location of their breeze; and from these who have their laughter multiplied; and from these who find the taste of the sacred in their mouth, or that their tongue is scorched and spits out the sacred; and from these who have their sleep multiplied, and from these who see the sacred in their sleep sorrow and ancientness and plagues and other causes that remind them of it.</end_of_turn>
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, whenever in any case of these, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command that the breeze be more useful than it has been for two or three hours.</end_of_turn
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the assistance of the breeze from the neck is that when it confers to gravity in the head and descends to the knees; however, it does not suffice that it should be close to the evacuation of all the body.</end_of_turn
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this breeze is in the place of the cephalic cautery.</end_of_turn
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not permitted to use those who are excessively cold or suffering from catarrh as attendants, as they give rise to great discomfort.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	For this reason it is not proper to use those who are too old or those who are feverish.</end_of_turn>
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More suitable are those who are continuously occupied with their duties; and therefore you must command the windpipe to withdraw its hand a little from the sides, fearing the generation of oblivion.</end_of_turn
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The blowing of aloes is better than the incision of the vein of the groin and the bladder: and therefore you must confirm to sneeze, and to constriction of bile and spleen, and to vomiting, and to filling up.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And you must cover the blowing of aloes with a little oil, for if it is stopped from below, it brings about debility in the body and in the stomach.</end_of_turn
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The blowing of chamomile brings about headaches and ophthalmia, and diarrhea, and fainting, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and is better than the incision of the mesentery.</end_of_turn
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you must command the windpipe not to touch its hand with scarification, so as not to puncture the artery and cause blood to flow backwards.</end_of_turn>
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The blowing from below will make the saliva comfortable, and will correct the corruption of the gums, and will keep them away from the diseases that are in the mouth, and will be better than the incision of the tonsils that are in the armpits.</end_of_turn
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Better is the blowing that is made over the two spatulas, as it brings about capitation, which is useful for replenishing heat.</end_of_turn
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The blowing of the armpits towards the flanks of the ribs brings about the support of the incision of three veins, namely the basilica, femoral and cephalic, for those three veins together take away all the greater veins that are in the flesh, and the smaller veins of the other veins which enter under the influence of the attraction of the three veins.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	Command the windpipe not to proceed excessively with the scarification, for the flesh is naked, and leaves the nerves and arteries exposed.</end_of_turn
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	This is a blowing that is made over the cushions and brings about the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers below.</end_of_turn
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you must command the windpipe to be a great blowing, and that it should be from the palms of the hands, for the flesh cannot digest a strong section; and for that matter there should be coarse and fine blows and be scarred with a scarification.</end_of_turn
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Better are the gentle blows from the palms of the hands than strong blows manifested for a moment, for they take away the blood of the whole body, and bring about relief of ancient pains of the kidneys and bladder; and provoke menstruation, and bring about vomiting and diarrhea; and are better than the incision of two large veins, and of the spleen, and of two hollow cavities.</end_of_turn
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they do not drive out all the blood from the whole body and cause fainting in many people.</end_of_turn>
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the support of vomiting is useful for the support of the blows from two veins.</end_of_turn
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the blows is that it stops the initial vomiting and supports the temperate vomiting, and does not prolong the position of the blows, but rather pauses them leisurely, and resumes them gently, and that the humors come to the place for their movement.</end_of_turn
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease until you see the place already swollen and puffed up and that the color of the blood appears.</end_of_turn
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And when you have finished, scarify and repeat the vomiting little by little, and take into consideration the condition of the body.</end_of_turn
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For the person who has a soft body of a rare complexion, you must make a slight incision and not too much, for the flesh is not to be ulcerated.</end_of_turn
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the windpipe to enlarge the incision a a little extent and to soften it, and to breathe slowly and easily.</end>
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickness in the blood, you must make two incisions, for in the first incision the passage of the veins to the blood and the water of the blood is opened up.</end_of_turn
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second incision the acquisition of the extraction of the thick blood is made.</end_of_turn>
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is not thick, you must make a third incision for the third time to achieve the fourth.</end_of_turn
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to extract a great piece of flesh, we must make a great sacrifice; and if we know that the flesh is large, we must make a more abundant sacrifice for it.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of sacrifice is the depth of the wound alone
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the wound is large, hard, fleshy, and its veins are straight, then let the areas of the veins be greased with milder unguents, opened and resolved; if it is in summer, thus as olive oil of aloes or violet oil, or oil of marigolds, or olive oil of poppy seeds; and if it is in winter, then olive oil of marigold, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of alum, and to those who are similar
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the discharge is large, frothy, then let the oil be bitter almond, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or pennyroyal oil, and those who are similar
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	May it be if the carrier has wide wounds of tough flesh, then let it be forbidden to give oil, and let the areas of the veins around it be washed with warm water or hot water of the sun, or with vinegar, or with wine, or with broth, and those who are similar
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the piece of flesh is of moist humidity, wash the veins with vinegar or with water of myrtle, mastic, and those who are similar
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the discharge is thick, wash the veins with strong vinegar or with decoction of rue or of chamomile, or of marigold, and those who are similar
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And let the wound be protected from the bath; having said that, it must be administered together with the bath for an hour or two, and let it rest on the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that should be done so that the wound from the phlebotomy does not appear on the wound?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the outset: if the phlebotomist or the one who gives the flebotomy is choleric and vents over the patient's flesh acutely and inflammation, then it must be foreseen to cause refrigerating causes, thus as great vinegar, and in vinegar of vinegar and salt, and alum, and chamomile, and those who are similar
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And suspend their meals thus as poultry, and fatty meats, and boiled foods with vinegar, and those who are similar
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the composition is cold, let it be foreseen to take almond butter or almond butter of poppy seeds, mastic, and vinegar of mint between broth and water; and that he be recommended to drink little and eat sparingly, and suspend meats of poultry and beef and fish and eggs and small meats and legumes
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And let the drink of the day of phlebotomy and wound be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let him be given in some hours at breakfast or dinner some medicines of musk, such as musk or alum, before or after the wound or phlebotomy, so that the principal members are comforted and the wound is diminished; and let them not take vinegar or strong drinks
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the wounds that must not be made a sacrifice are those that are upon the chest and foot, and upon the navel, in the joints, and the armpits, because these members must not suffer a sacrifice upon them
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for these except for the attraction of flesh from the member, thus as they stop the wound over the nipple in the disease of the flux of blood from the member; and they use that to dissolve the cold wind that is hidden in the member, thus as over the belly and the navel; for that makes the member limp and scalds it and leaves the pain that resolves the cold wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is stopped over the boils when it happens in their boiling or putrefaction, because by the virtue of strong attraction it makes the fluid boil or putrefy and drives out the pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And thus it is done when it is stopped over the chest and the foot, it drives out the cold wind in those enclosed places
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These winds are administered cold with vinegar only; and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered full of hot water in the diseases of the chest.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the wind must be full and large, so it is only hot water or water in which herbs are boiled according to what is convenient
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wind administered with fire: the breadth of the orifice of two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of fuel is that of a palm; and it is in the lap, in the place where it is in the circuit, the greatest part; the smoke is small according to the quantity that enters it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Whether from egg or orange, citron, marjoram, laurel, gentian and angelica, so that it does not damage the limb its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the middle of it, a transverse incision of egg or iron, where a candle is held with fire
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this wind is greater than that which we have recommended; and little more of that according to the ailments and the state of the one who uses it
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the winds of the elders are extended to others than the winds of the youths and of great courses
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this wind with fire to the limb is that you extend the flame of fire of wood adequately forward a little candle of wax, and you apply that to the middle of the transverse incision in the middle place of the wind, so that the fire is kindled around the perimeter of the illness so that it is not consumed by the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And return it to the limb of the patient, and say that concerning the smoke that we have said, when we have the winds and we do not indicate that they should remain there, and that the vapor escapes from that hole, the wind will be as much dissolved
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And again ignite the flame according to its manner, and repeat that if you do not indicate that you are finishing with that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the wind that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse incision or burn, and which is not administered except that it is filled with water, and is applied only to the limb alone
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the way: And this wind, the greater it is, the better, because it receives a great quantity of water
Capitol .xcvii.	End of document
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood is not administered in all members but in the limbs in which it is not possible to place the wind, for the smallness of those, thus as with the thumb and little finger and the like; or in a limb denuded of flesh, thus as with the palm of the hand and the like.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those blood vessels that you have found in the deep veins of the foot is that they are in the abundance of mud and earth
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And return the intestines or hernia to their cavity in the morning and in the evening in deep water so that they are softened, and that no remaining cause remains in their belly; and immediately evacuate the body with foam and wind; and cool the limb of the patient until it turns red; and then apply the above-mentioned things
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And thus are they filled and in case<end_turn>
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to drain the area with the wind, it is better for the benefit<end_turn
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, the hours wash the area with wine and add a little water; and scrub and press.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the disease prolongs, add a sponge of lead in cold water, and place that on it until the secretion is discharged<end_turn>
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the disease is multiplied, the hours sprinkle over it powdered vitriol, or urine and resembling their strict causes, until the disease is cured; or that the points are placed on the surface of the limb the greatest quantity of scraped honey, and that they are left until the honey adheres to the limb, and that the disease is cured.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And cover, if necessary, repeated bloodletting, when it is possible to change them<end_turn
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited, the hours frequently wet the limb with the disease or leave a needle in the places until the disease is cured; and immediately stop them when any sign of healing appears in the limb.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you wish to bathe, sprinkle over those a little of ground aloe or salt or ash, and bathe thoroughly
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus ends the part of the treatise concerning restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very useful necessary in the art of medicine; and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation of bones accidentally<end_turn
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son of these chapters the fools doctors and the vulgar people and those who for a long time do not remember the ancients or do not read their books.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Therefore, this method of the scientists in our land is a secret; and I have never forgotten it at any time in my life; and I have not divulged it until now, except after having studied the writings of the ancients and understanding them thoroughly.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	I have also directed experiments and studies throughout my life on this matter.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already mentioned in this chapter all that concerns my science and the experiments which I have conducted on this; for I have abridged what I have said to you elsewhere and spared you the details of my research; and I have mentioned in conclusion what I have learned from these observations; and I have set out in this chapter the various forms of treatment which are administered in this case, just as is done in addition to the declaration in the previous chapters.</end_of_turn>
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.</end_of_turn>
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection of the fractures of bones, from which it is necessary to proceed before we begin the reminder of fractured limbs and various other parts of the body.</end_of_turn
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, as we shall say at the beginning of this chapter, we shall speak of the sums of the work; and the chapters which follow are intended to bring to your understanding the artifices and their station on the truth of these matters; for you and those who are learned in this art will know or learn it from us.</end_of_turn
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when an accident of fracture, dislocation, twist or any other similar case occurs, it is necessary at the outset to apply a blistering plaster or bandage, or some other means, if these do not prevent any cause, even if it be a matter of virtue, or if the patient be a young child, or an old man, or if it be a time of great heat or great cold.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And thus let us take nourishment only of light herbs, fish, birds and crabs; and let us avoid large meats and fat foods which obstruct the blood of the veins of health, until we are certain that the caut has stopped, and if you do not fear the escape of matter from the limb.</end_of_turn
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And when the patient has recovered, return him to his first place with the attendants who usually attend to him.</end_of_turn
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Therefore, when the fractured bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be given nourishing food which is neither too thick nor too thin, such as bread soaked in water, broth, eggs, fish, beef, almonds, turnips, and peas, and in this regimen there is a coagulation of the fracture which is more perfect and lasting.</end>
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you must know that bones which are fractured in the elderly or in decrepitude never completely reunite and consolidate according to their nature, because of the drying up of the limb.</end_of_turn
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and reunited according to their nature all the time by the drying up of those limbs, and they are reunited and consolidated at the end of their lives, just as the bones of small children.</end_of_turn
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But the nature makes amends and remembers that the fractured bone has been suffered from every side for a long time, so that when it is reunited with its fellow bones, it adheres to them with great strength, until it is finally united with them, just as fire burns at the beginning, until no cause prevents it from doing its work.</end_of_turn
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	Therefore it is necessary to abstain from nourishing the patient with foods which are heavy and viscous and large, as we have said.</end_of_turn
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many different types of fracture according to the nature of the limb.</end_of_turn
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you must know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the nature of the limb, for the fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the forearm; and so on with all the other limbs.</end_of_turn
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I remember all the different species of fracture, which are explained in distinct chapters of this book.</end_of_turn
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many different types of fracture exist in general.</end_of_turn
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are diverse species of fractures in general; for example, a fracture of the bone in its star-shaped area; and some fractures are called complete fractures, while others are incomplete fractures, just as in the case of writing when one uses a pen, which is a fractured bone with a split in the head, or a slight fracture.</end_of_turn
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every kind there is an appropriate remedy or treatment which will be remembered in the distinct places of the body.</end_of_turn
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Motion signifies a fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thus is known a fracture of the bone: it is a twisting of the limb, with the protrusion and displacement of the limb, and so from it when pressure is applied to it with the hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting of the limb or if it is not suspected to be fractured, do not touch the bone unless you see clear agitation and the patient experiences great pain, for then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There is also the possibility of a slight twisting or small fracture; in which case do not press on it with your hand or compress it; wait a moment and remember the medicines that you know are appropriate in such a case; and do so with stricture of the limb.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the limb is bent and is not broken in two or otherwise that does not cause it to become limp, as is commonly seen throughout its part, then you must begin to rectify it immediately.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it becomes swollen afterwards, leave it for some days until the swelling subsides; and then apply any means that you can think of to levitate and support it
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of the limb and its nourishment is lighter than that of the bone in which the fracture occurred.<end_turn>
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And take care as you will remember it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	Moreover, if the bone is fractured, it is necessary to extend the limb from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And keep its position so that the limb remains equal according to its natural figure, while the fractured parts are extended from the limb, so that you can perform its restoration as easily as possible.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Be careful that you do not cause further pain or injury to the patient during your treatment; and perform it in such a way that the bones support each other as much as possible in a thousand different ways
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And take advantage at that moment of your touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is any other cause, rectify that and support that to the extent of your ability
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Avoid excessive extension and compression, as do many foolish doctors who perform these operations by causing swelling with their cautery or causing spasm in the limb as they have seen in the operations of their foolish colleagues.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And take note, equal calmness, decent performance of the operation and stricture of that limb, rest and tranquility; remind the patient about this and make him believe that he should not suffer in the hours of his watchfulness and sleep, and see his recovery and agitation, and do his elimination, and do all his movements with all his ability; and wait until you can change the position of the limb to one that ensures him no longer feels pain; for the cause of this is that when it is placed in the position of the painful limb or injury, it causes him pain; so change it to another position that does not cause him pain; and keep it steady and equal so that the limb does not suffer twisting when it is restored
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the stricture of the limb is that which I recommend; for you know that fractured limbs are diverse in their size and shape
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm, the finger and the toe, the covering should be of soft material.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the forearm, cover them with firm and hard material, which will connect the great limb firmly and strengthen it throughout its entirety without damaging it
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And so, begin, make your evacuation of equipment convenient, and tie the ligament properly in that place where the fracture is to be made with three coverings or four as the limb deserves; and strengthen your hand a little on the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And look at that part furthest from the fracture site, and strengthen less than that where you have strengthened the fractured part.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And gradually lengthen the covering of the fracture site a a moderate degree, and soften the stricture little by little, until you can grasp the limb well again.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another bandage and cover that other covering over the fractured limb with the covering, and look at the coverings at the furthest part of the fracture; and do your operation on the tightening of the covering and the softening of that as we said in the first covering
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	If there is a twist in the fracture, and it is twisted, then pause between the edges of the swelling, if there is swelling; otherwise, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	If there is no swelling or pus, leave the dressing in place for a few days; and if there is pus or swelling, support the area firmly.</end_of_turn>
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The edges of the wound must be firmly supported and the dressing must be formed skillfully; or it may be of felt or palm leaves; and let the width of each dressing be as follows:...</end_of_turn>
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But the dressing that is placed on that fracture must be larger and wider than the others, and the length of the dressing must be according to the size of the limb in magnitude and in width; and support the dressing firmly on the other side according to your first rule; and hold in place firmly as we have said above, and that the dressing should be as much as the fracture itself, and as little as the fracture is prolonged.</end_of_turn>
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be finer in thickness and in flexibility, and be of thread; and if the threads are coarse, thus I have seen for the operation of many fractures when the threads are cut during the tightening of the dressing, and this is a great error, when the dressing is taken out equal to the fracture.</end_of_turn
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Subtle threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve a tightening of the dressing as you wish; and do not let there be less than a finger's breadth between the dressings.</end_of_turn>
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient's pain is in the extremities of the limbs, pause the tightening in those places until it does not cause him damage.</end_of_turn
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are like wounds, and accidents of disruption in the bone, and I recall in the capitol according to singularity.</end_of_turn
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And remember that every fractured limb is not straight at first; the cause of this is that when the limb is great, it does not suffice to support it on the dressing for a few days or a few weeks, according to your security of the advancement of pus.</end_of_turn
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way that the ancients restored the plasters, which were placed on fractures, dislocations and twists.</end_of_turn>
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering as seen in the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complex cases and especially for women and men, because of which it is that about which neither heat nor cold is harmful: and take powdered charcoal, which is the medula of the wheat that is left over from the dough in the manufacture of bread.</end_of_turn
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And do the same if there is an album of blood, and pause the application of the dressing until it is not thick or sticky; and use that.</end_of_turn
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of dressing a fracture, dislocation or twist: recipe of asafoetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and marigold, which is ground from a thousand grains of fennel, five grains of myrrh and five grains of aloes; twenty grains of aloe. All of these are powdered and sifted and mixed with water, or with egg white if the patient's wound is raw; and use this dressing, for it is of good composition and strengthens the broken bones pleasantly, and gives comfort to the patient.</end_of_turn>
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of dressing a fracture which gives comfort: recipe marigold and white alum to two drachmas; of myrrh and aloes five to each drachm; of acacia six to each drachm; of linseed twenty to each drachm.</end_of_turn
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	...all are crushed in a mortar with a rough stone, and are ground, and are mixed with water or with blood and is administered.</end>
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of joints and bones separated from their locations, and that causes pain in those, fractures and breaks: take lancets and immerse them in vinegar and oil, and place them on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this treatment there is no benefit of restoration, of ointment, but rather expulsion of the pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of treatment that restores broken bones: take figs and poppy seeds; mix them up and make a plaster of them
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortened method of treatment that is administered after fracture of bones and when you wish to resolve the residue of ointment: mix meadowsweet, chamomile and violets flowers, barley flour, and all of this together. All of this is crushed and mixed with vinegar, if the limb is not scorched.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scorched, however, the best is to soften it with water of gentian or with water and use it as a compress
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of dressing is stronger in resolving this than the previous one, when the accident is of thick ointment must be restored to the limb: mix meadowsweet and linseed seeds, barley, balm, marjoram, violets, chamomile, all of this together and saffron; crush all of this and mix it with vinegar or other liquid or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the degree of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Hippocrates does not say that it is proper to leave an open wound free that must be placed on the limb after its restoration, except for certain occasions where it is necessary to do so with wax and oil; and I recommend that it be more moderate between thickness and thinness
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Indeed in Gaul it is seen that it is placed on the fractured limb after its restoration and the causes in which it is necessary to leave it exposed with little heat so as to do in the case of myrrh, incense and similar things to these causes that we have recommended
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of dressing that relieves the lesion and pain: mix wheat, barley, poppy seeds, ground ivy or fennel seeds, meadowsweet, salt, and saffron; crush all of this together and sift it, and make a plaster of it.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The quantity should be such that it covers the ligature and if it is too little it is not sufficient to stop the pain or the swelling or if the bone is fractured it is not worth having it. In such a case do not remove the dressing for several days
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if the limb has sudden pain or swelling or inflammation, then take it away or remove it in that moment and leave the plaster on it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take sponge of linen and marine sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse that in lukewarm water; with which wash the limb until the swelling and pain cease; then remove the dressing from the limb for an hour; then place over it lancets soaked in vinegar and oil or olive oil, and bind over it for a night until you are certain that the ointment has healed, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, and that the pain has gone away.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And do this in such a way as to make the dressing smaller and less strict, and do not bind it too tightly for your first constriction, but rather do it gradually as it improves.</start_of_turn>
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the ointment has healed and the swelling and pain and inflammation have gone away and all the accidents have already disappeared, and digestion of the dressing and stricture has begun, then repeat this in the same way as you did at the beginning when you began to make the plaster.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other accident occurs to the limb of those we have mentioned, do not remove the dressing until three or four or five or seven days have passed Some authors leave it for xx days as we have said, according to the appearance of the limb for the loosening of the bone, until the fracture has healed, and until the blood clot has coagulated over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjust the bandage more gently than at the beginning of the treatment, and in the digestion of the patient's food, as it is preceded by the memory of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If sometimes the limb of the fracture has dried out and become loose more than it covers, then you must know that nutrition is prohibited for it; therefore give it lukewarm water instead of food for three days; and relieve the dressing a little; for this operation will restore the limb to nutrition and will heal it well
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More than the fools of the healers of the fracture of the limb, another treatment for the restoration of the limb is more harmful than helpful when not restored from the beginning, according to the covering of the wound; for it is harmful by the operation of its makers, and fear is great, and if they did not know how to do it, it would increase the pangs in the limb when it is free and make it worse in the water of treatment.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have never seen anyone do that, for it is more reasonable that it does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.</end_of_turn>
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are blows, and the figures of them are various, and the causes are different, for every fracture is caused by percussion of space, and the percussion hinders all the bone within the cavity, which is left to the bone, just as it happens in the wrist; and because of this this species is called traumatic; or the space strikes any part of the bone, and strikes the marrow of it and does not pass the incision through to the back of it; and this species of fracture is called complete fracture.</end_of_turn>
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and of a fracture that is contracted or retracted; and the cause of them is percussion with a blunt or sharp object, and they resemble each other.</end_of_turn
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that has already approached the canal which is left to the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or little.</end_of_turn
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the fracture is that which is hidden in the bone, in the substance of the small vein, and because of this it is called capillary fracture.</end_of_turn
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And the fracture is that which is caused by blow or by chance or by percussion of stone and that causes any layer of the bone to enter the parts surrounding it, and it is fatal in the hollow part just as when it happens to the nails when they are struck by percussion and some of them enter the surrounding parts.</end_of_turn
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is mostly fatal when it happens to the bones of humid substances, just as with their heads.</end_of_turn
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these traumatic fractures are like pieces of glass that are separated from each other.</end_of_turn
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I come to mourn for all that is in this place.</end_of_turn>
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these species of fractures by recognition for their detection on them and for their inquiry in their attempts and for the presence of corrupted marrow that is over them.</end_of_turn
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The capillary fracture is known for appearing on the bone, and is excised, and is limited on it with a pin, which makes the fracture appear black.</end_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture attention should be paid at the beginning to the signs of the disease, and when sometimes for the signs that indicate seriousness such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, syncope, high fever, and suddenness of these symptoms, as well as the presence of these symptoms in their most severe forms, even if they are not healing.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if sometimes non-violent accidents happen to you, you hope for health, the hour you begin the treatment of them.</end_of_turn
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of which is that if it is provoked at the beginning like that which is provoked in the days of spring, the hour you study in the bone marrow until the thirteenth day according to all custom.</end_of_turn
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, the hour you must keep the bone marrow until the seventh day, having left the bone marrow corrupted from the canal, and that these accidents happen which we have recommended.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the canal covering the brain, and is contracted in small parts and retracted, the hour you must insert the diminished part and retract it, as I recommend to you.</end_of_turn
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you take the head of the disease that is plagued, and uncover the bone according to custom and handle it as you are able according to the figure of the plague, and that you inquire about the disease.</end_of_turn
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if an accident happens to you, you must oppose the detection of the bone, flux of blood or caut dressing, the hour you are opposed to it as much as possible, and that you cover the area with cloths soaked in wine and oil, and make the plague rest until the swelling subsides; and be sure to flux blood of the vein; and begin to move the limb around the bone and in the cavity.</end_of_turn
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to two methods of operation.</end_of_turn
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one of the methods is that you insert the bone with a straight incision like this, and this is its form: And then administer another incision of a little more wide than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer even more of the wider incision.</end_of_turn
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	The sovereign shall declare his name to the scribes, for some of them are more learned than others; and some of them are more brief than others and are at the rear of the order of their limbs, and they are of iron or venomous.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use of them allows for easy percussion on the scribes so that they do not bruise the head and cause them to bleed.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, then cover that you perform the puncture around it while you administer the scribes, which are named superficial not profound
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus except when those that do not stop the limit of the bone towards that which is adjacent to them, for when the puncture is round about the limb or margin over that which is left, the head of the limb appears like a margin or a small circle, which prohibits it from being immersed and passing the spiciness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these superficial punctures of which some will please the spiciness of each bone, except when in all tests of the head the limb which is acute in length and shortness is that of which you are now speaking
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of punctures: The quality of puncturing around the fractured bone is that you pause the puncture on the bone and rotate that around the toes until you know that the bone is already pierced; and then change the puncture to another location and stop when there is between every fracture the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And so it is appropriate to touch the scribes between every fracture of the bone, and make them more subtle than you would over that in order to lift it, as we have said, until you have extracted the bone, or with your hand, or by any other cause that may cause them to be stirred, as for example nails and fine forceps
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And know that you must take great care that the scribe does not touch any cause of swelling.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore when the bone is pierced around, and if it is separate from the swelling if it is continued with it, and when you have extracted it, know that you must grasp and hold that which is in the roughness of it from that which is in the bone like another puncture, but indeed that it should be more tense and more subtle than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there remain any small pieces of bones and cartilages, then take that with ease with what is due from the pains; and indeed take care of the wound with liniment and ointments that we have mentioned
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another manner of operation is light, long and laborious, which is to dissect Gualia and the heel for great healing; and this is the saying of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to uncover the part of the bone in the location of the fracture which is the most acute and most obvious, until when you have discovered that part and you have stopped leaving the limb of that puncture slow and joyful of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the flat part is round and does not touch any cause, and the acute part is of it in two layers from front to back, as often as not; that the flat part be adjusted to the swelling with the face of the acutely incident part on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And so pierce about the puncture with a slight blow so that you can rotate it easily, and you must be sure of the safety that it does not happen by chance that you fear in any manner, and if the physician was the most learned of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there remains any attached cause to the bone of the knuckle in any location of the bone, puncture that with the limb of the puncture that is flat, and deliver that with ease, because it is delivered from it without document and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pulp, and that which is broken off or remains of the bone is the face of it, and remains in it roughness and cartilages subtle, then know that you must grasp that roughness and extract those cartilages with subtle reasons for which you have prepared a number, of various quantities so that you can manage them in all locations in the most convenient way and the most subtle of them according to what you lose in your operation that broken bone and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And know that you must administer at your ratio with which reasons the bone at the beginning of the most lateral of those reasons, and indeed use that which is of the most subtle of them, and do not cease until you have finished administering the most tense and the most subtle of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Indeed in any other small fractures capillary and slight fracture subtle, know that you must take care according to what you lose for the rectification of it
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	For it is not hidden that all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And thus we stand upon what has been shown to us in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the swelling is rectangular when you extract the bone, then take as much of the limb as is necessary according to the extent of the plague, and immerse that in oil of rosemary, and place that over the orifice of the plague; and then take another bandage doubled or tripled and immerse it in wine and oil of rosemary and place that over the first bandage and do so until the pus comes out readily from that, that you do not damage the flesh; and then apply about that some unguents, and do not tighten that except for the extent of the plague alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that for a day or two until you are certain that the swelling has subsided; and then remove that and administer medicines which are useful for drying, such as rue seeds and barley flour, and powdered gentian and arnica, and like those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you grind these medicines into powder that is spread over the plague; and generally, administer all medicines of proven property that will stop bleeding and not cause death
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And take care that the plague in your care does not become worse; and do not put anything greasy on it; neither leave it uncovered; for when it is adjusted upon the bone of the brain, it corrupts that and brings about death, and brings about that which is malicious.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And do the same in the head, as when it is modified by the bone and especially when its care is diminished, and is black in its surface; and therefore consider that if an accident occurs to the patient during the treatment of the plague, that is pernicious in its entirety
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no accident occurs except for the medicine that is being discontinued, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take a little more of that medicine and a little more of rosemary oil three parts. and put on that some bandage, and place that over the wound; and care for that with the spices of treatment that you consider until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.</start_of_turn
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not fractured but rather two pieces are separated with abundant pus so that in it there are two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous and is not fractured and does not cause it any harm but rather itching and torment and swelling.</start_of_turn
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	May it even be fractured one of the two parts of the nose, then you must insert little by little in the ditch of the nose that engulfs that fracture as much as the index finger and as much as the thumb, until the nose returns to its natural figure.</start_of_turn
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And it is done for you to facilitate this, and take care that you do not cause him any pain during that treatment of the patient.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the soft part of the nose, and you say that it is not for this, then you must make it equal to the extremity of the ray where the smallness is.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same for that.</start_of_turn
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And keep the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then leave it for six days or eight days so that you can give it time to heal.</start_of_turn
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert in the extremity of the nose a bandage of linen, if the fracture is in one part, or two collars, if the fracture is in two parts, and the collar has the thickness of such quantity that it fills the ditch of the nose.</start_of_turn
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say to the former restorers that the collars should be bound on the edge, and should be changed throughout the day, even though I do not see it; because you must know that the bandage should be bound with moist hemp soaked in vinegar with powdered oatmeal.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some people put sponges inside the nose instead of a collar, because of the increase of pus which is enveloped in linen; and that you know that the fracture of the nose is very severe and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do that.</start_of_turn>
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another sponge comes out during treatment, cover the nose with cerate or coat it with fat infused with wine and rosemary oil, or with diaperium.</start_of_turn
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if it does not come out during treatment, cover it with barley flour and powdered gentian with moist hemp soaked in vinegar; and place over that a lion, and do not lie the nose down for any reason.</start_of_turn
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If even the bones of the nose are fractured in a small or large degree, it is necessary to make an incision above them, extract them with the instruments that are appropriate for them; and then close the incision, and care for that which encloses and consolidates, and apply appropriate plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is swelling in the nose, it is necessary to cure that by compressing it and administering lead canulas until it is completely healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter III.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.</end_of_turn
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is fractured and the fracture is not associated with swelling, it is necessary to assess if the fracture is displaced only, and not fractured in two parts and bent outwards. In this case, the pain is slight.</end_of_turn
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth; and in the same way, if the fracture is on the left side, insert the index finger of the right hand; and push with both hands at the base of the fracture outwards, facilitating the displacement of the fragments.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two parts, it is necessary to administer extension of the two parts according to the rectitude until it is possible to equalize them.</end_of_turn
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is displacement of teeth with fracture, extract those that you expect to remain whole with gold, silver or ivory; and then stop bleeding on the fractured jaw, and place a swab over the fracture twice, and over the large pulp correspondingly; and ligate that which is appropriate for the fracture, as it is bound.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the patient to rest and tranquility, and abstain from eating for a lion's share of days.</end_of_turn>
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you see that the figure has already been altered in any way, cover it up and remove it on the third day; and then correct what has already been altered of it and plaster that which is left with powder of wheat, albumin of eggs, or oatmeal, because you do not want to leave anything else of it uncovered, and cover with a linen bandage.</end_of_turn
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when it is fixed and adjusted that plaster on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it as it is, do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for if the swelling of this fracture is not reduced in three periods.</end_of_turn
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another swelling occurs afterwards, administer what has been said of the swelling in the peace of it until it is healed, and remove that swelling.</end_of_turn
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is associated with swelling, consider if it is a simple fracture of the bone or a dislocation, for in this case you are recommended to leave those dislocations until they are resolved with those which cause them.</end_of_turn
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound is narrow, expand it with the flebotomy according to the quantity of your need.</end_of_turn
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finished removing those dislocations, and of those which you do not remove, close the wound if it is wide; otherwise, place over that one of the plasters that is appropriate and consolidate that which is left, until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.</end_of_turn
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The fracture of the collarbone is usually caused by damage to the muscles on the front of the bone.</end_of_turn
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is fractured, or separated, or separated into two parts which do not cause dislocations; and it is necessary to restore it; or if dislocations occur with it, it is difficult to restore it; or if the fracture is associated with swelling.</end_of_turn
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is associated with swelling, is that two assistants are present, one to support the fractured collarbone and the other to extend the shoulder on that side.</end_of_turn
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And apply pressure to the fracture with the thumbs until the shape of it is restored according to what is appropriate, without leaving it excessively tense or flattened.</end_of_turn
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you see more extension, cover the thumb of the patient with a pad or cloth, and make the size of it according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the collarbone and cover the swelling with your hand until the fracture is resolved according to what is appropriate.</end_of_turn
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If the thumb cannot be drawn out from the socket, so that it reaches the wrist, then cover that the patient should be supine on their neck, and place a cushion under their muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The attendants according to the muscle of the thumb to the outside must elevate the bone of the thumb so that it reaches the wrist, and then you can rectify the fracture and bind what is between the thighs together
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Even if you feel pain in the thumb and swelling, cover that you should lie over that area and extract those swellings easily
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, cover that you make an incision of the thumb with one of the instruments which you have prepared, because you have already stopped the thumb from the pain that serves the wrist; and that pain is of the bone or of iron of which this is the form
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is similar to a wound of which this is the cavity; and its width according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the incision should be as much as possible for the operation; that there be two extremities thus as many times, and that one extremity be broad and the other narrow
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the membrane which you have incised when you have extracted the swelling from the bone is wide, and you are sure of aftercare, cover that you adjust the two lips of the membrane together with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is slight, or you fear aftercare, cover that you cover the membrane with gauze and powder according to the quantity of the wound of the membrane
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if aftercare is delayed, cover that you soak in warm oil and vinegar and oil, and rest over that area
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is rigid when the wound is closed and the section is finished, that you place a plaster of broken wheat with an egg white on the wound and put a lion over it, and put a little powder around the edges of the wound, if you are not satisfied with that, and take a little moisture, as the Sarrazins say, that is neither too long nor too short, and the width of it from thumb to thumb or about as much; and put double powder around the wound and the plaster; and take a nail of moderate size, which is about three fingers wide and as long as the wound itself; and wrap this around the wound, and wrap the wound around the nail over the fracture; and take a little moisture as before, and turn the wound over the head of the thumb and over the thumb of the patient, and reduce the wound over the whole part, and when the fracture is rigid with the surrounding tissues, that is what is not hidden under your hand.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	All this, however, that the nail should not be seen over the broken bone; and so that you see the patient every day, because when the ligament is softened or the nail itself is already softened, cover that you rectify this and strengthen the bandage
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And finally, keep the patient's foot elevated over the head, and leave the thumb resting on the foot for the night a little cushion; so that the adjutors of the thumb are elevated at the elevation of the muscle; or that the arm of the thumb is bound to the head of the thumb.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the bandage if no accident has occurred in the place or aftercare, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And renew the plaster if you have seen the face of the wound to that, and adjust in the rigidity and restore that and leave until it is restored and the fracture of the thumb is coagulated
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And is strong and comfortable according to the month in xxviii days, and some herbs in several homes is useful in a month of that time.
Capitol .vi.	End of Document
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Treatment of Thumb Fractures
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The thumb bone is broken in the middle part of the joint and not at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is broken in the middle of the joint – and it is broken in the middle of the thumb – and it is not known except by touch, cover that according to the figure of the fracture force you to prepare it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every way that is possible for you to do
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And put over the wound a plaster of broken wheat with an egg white and put a lion over it; and put a little powder around the wound; and put a little moisture around the nail of moderate size
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the nail is left with a cavity in some parts of the wound, cover that you cover that cavity with a lion, and put the nail equal again
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then draw down your hand with a long stroke from the constriction downwards towards the heel, without stretching the skin too tightly.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the ligament in each part; and whenever it is seen to be softened, bind another one and stretch it equally so that it is neither too tight nor too loose
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And hold the patient's thigh towards the side with your hand.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in about xx days or in xxv
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament and know for certain that that which is from the bones from which you began is neither feared nor dissolved.</start_of_turn>
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the foot bone and leave the tendon behind, then you will split over it and leave it, and do as has been said in the fracture of the sadistic prominence of the scapula bone.</start_of_turn>
Capitol .vii.	End of Document.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot bone.</start_of_turn
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The bones of the foot are fractured in the middle of their length, and this is where they must be broken; but their extremities must not be broken because they must remain whole and flexible.</start_of_turn
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And as for the accidents of the foot when its middle is fractured, they are that it is inclined downwards towards the plantar part and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, vomiting and fainting; and is declared in the cavity of the fractured bone and is not concealed from the feeling.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that you rest the patient on the two thighs, and place between the buttocks of the patient a cushion; and then press on the muscles of the foot, and adjust the ribs to the greatest extent of two ribs, and support them in the operation of it and in the equalization according to all the rules that are possible and convenient, until you restore the shape of the bone as it was before.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then pause over the plaster and bandage and pause over the dressing of soft gauze or cloth and their remnants in suspension; because you encase them in wax. And then support that which is above the fractured bone so that it is not bruised; and keep it bound according to the rounding of each ligament, and stretch that which is of stricture downwards; and consider the ligament at all times, and when it is softened stretch that one.</start_of_turn
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary you cause a loosening of that, you must correct the inflammation or swelling, pain or prominence that occurs in the place, then you will cover it and remove that and rectify what has happened in such a way as to care for it; and then reduce the plaster, sometimes up to the face; and adjust the stricture so that it is healthy.</start_of_turn
Capitol .viii.	End of Document.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the back when it is fractured.</start_of_turn
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that the fracture of the ribs does not take place except in the hollow parts that follow the two; and as for the extremities of them from the front part, it does not cause them to curve inwards but only because of the cartilage.</start_of_turn
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And you must recognize that it is not hidden from the feeling that you must inquire about it according to what is said.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is just as to embrace the fracture according to what is said, except that it must be embraced according to that which covers it, and then support the fractured bone with a splint, if you do not wish for that.</start_of_turn
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined downwards towards the plantar part, then it causes the patient great pain and puncture, just as if it were a puncture of that which has pleura, and because the bone puts on the membrane; and it causes difficulty in swallowing, coughing, vomiting and fainting; and this is of difficult care.</start_of_turn
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients have devised in that way that it should not impede.</start_of_turn
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And so they say: cover that you suspend food from the patient that generates inflammation and wind, so that the belly is not swollen and is extended, and the fracture is impeded from the parts outwards.</start_of_turn
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we avoid this so that it is not the cause of causing further pain; and if it has already happened, then you can help with that.</start_of_turn
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And I say to you that the wind should be stopped and that you should take with forcitude; and it is like reasoning, but indeed it is feared that the wind will draw out the humors from the place because of the weakness.</start_of_turn
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And he said to them: cover the wound with a bandage that is already submerged in oil, and let fine particles of alum between the ribs until it is full, that is, let the dressing adhere when it covers the wound again; and then let the pain be treated with the care of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes violent constriction of the pain that does not suffer, and you pierce it with a pointed needle, remember about the pain, for when you cover the wound, uncover the area around the fracture, and then stop that instrument which conserves the bowels, remembering that which precedes it, and that it facilitates the bones, and extract it.</end_of_turn>
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And if it is great, we should suture the two lips of the wound, and cure that with plasters until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it happens that there is swelling after the bath, then let your hand rest in olive oil and place it over the wound, and let the pain be treated with what covers the swelling after the bath.</end_of_turn>
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And rest on the side on which you sleep, until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the spine of the thigh and the heel.</end_of_turn>
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases the fracture occurs in the bones of the heel, and sometimes at the thigh bones. The spine bones are affected in the same way.</end_of_turn
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when such things happen to some, and you wish to know if he is healed or not, consider that sometimes the wounds are more softened, but sometimes they are swollen and dead, and you cannot bend them or extend them or stretch them, and when you compress them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and you do not feel pain in them, then you know that he is not healed, and in these matters of disposition it is deadly.</end_of_turn
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you see that and feel that constriction with your fingers and needle, then you know that the marrow of the bone is saved and that the pain will go away with care.</end_of_turn
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine bones of the heel like that and you wish to know if he is healed or not, then consider the weight of his foot.</end_of_turn
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then sometimes when they are softened, the accident has occurred in the most important, and when you put your hand on the two thighs, you feel heat and swelling, and some people fall asleep on the two thighs and are unable to urinate, then you know that it is deadly, and do not work on his care.</end_of_turn
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	May it be that no other cause of these has occurred, the cause is better and lighter.</end_of_turn
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the care of them is that you perforate the wound with a cautery needle that rests over the fractured spine, with olive oil or with cold compresses of vinegar; place your hand over that until the wound is closed.</end_of_turn
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And let us pause one of the comfortable plasters and put on that which binds; and command the patient to rest and be tranquil and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.</end_of_turn
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the fracture has occurred from a fall or any other cause that has separated from it, then let us cover that with a bandage and keep that bone in place; and then suture the two lips of the wound, if it is great, and cure that with the care of the wound, until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if it is fractured at the back of the thigh bone, and it is the end of the limb, then let us put our left hand over the buttock and grasp the fractured bone with the right hand as well as is possible; and then let us put on the bandage and plaster, if necessary, and keep that still.</end_of_turn
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if the heel bones are fractured in them, then let us rest over that, and keep that, and cure the wound with the care that precedes it until it is healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the limb.</end_of_turn
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the limb are often fractured, and if they are fractured, then the fracture is only a communication in the extremities of those and is inscribed in the length and declines towards the inward parts; and it happens that the patient feels pain in the area and punctures, and the limb is stupefied when it is fractured.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over that which is over the fracture in the shape of it.</end>
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only in the extremity, then you must embrace that part as it is normally worn until it is put back into its natural position.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Even if the fracture is in the leg or is already drooping downwards, then you must make the patient lie on the abdomen until such time as you are ready to restore the fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And therefore when you have embraced that part, stop over the dressing, and then stop over the bandage of lint or wool, and strengthen it with a tight bandage over which you do not fear making points of fracture or removing the splinter
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Embrace the concavity with that which is within that which supports the restriction according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their side or recline on their side as well
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If blood vessels should happen to burst after the cautery, then you must stop the extension of the limb and the restoration of the limb until the blood vessel has clotted, and stop over it until that which is precedent has passed; and then return to the restoration of the limb, and strengthen it thus as before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it should happen in the heel bones or they are fractured, then you must treat them
Capitol .xi.	(The text ends abruptly here.)
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adjunct.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjunct is that which is between the hip bone and the head of the femur
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, the restoration of the limb is in two ways, of which one is that you take a piece of bone of moderate size following this fashion:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And suspend it from the elevated place with two ligaments
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And keep the patient lying on a seat; and then pull the fractured limb out from over the bone until it reaches the middle part of the limb from which the curvature of the limb is appended
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if there is any other serious cause, or if the limb is too stiff, extend the limb downwards; and the physician must place something that supports the fracture more firmly, until the fracture returns as it should
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be placed lying down on the neck and suspend the hand of the limb from the collarbone by a ligament; and command two assistants to hold one that supports the fracture on its sides; and the other to hold the limb; and each of them extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you wish that the extension should be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture by a ligament and over that by another ligament, and each of the assistants extend their two parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, cover that half of the ligament over the trochanter and the other over the fracture against the hipbone.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly if the fracture is near the hipbone, cover that ligament over that place and over the hipbone
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Embrace that which is easy and useful, and when it is sufficiently embraced as it should be, then strengthen that which is not blood clotted after the cautery
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Even if blood vessels should burst after the cautery, then lay aside the restriction until the seventh day, and stop over it a bandage of wool and oil of rosemary until the blood vessel has clotted, and then strengthen that again
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen that is to place the plaster over the fracture, and then place a layer of lint around the plaster; and adjust the arm over that adjunct, and place your hand open over the muscle
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And suspend the limb and strengthen over the adjunct the arm so that the arm is in place, if nothing else prevents it from any cause of the fractured bone
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use crutches.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place over the fracture that staple which is stronger and sturdier than the others; and place between each staple the width of a finger, and the length of the staples according to the fracture in addition to three fingers from the whole part
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And strengthen over the staples on the restriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your restriction over the location of the fracture be more straight
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, the restriction is smaller
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Therefore if sometimes the position of the staples and the restriction is as we have said at the hour when we restored the limb to its natural position, then you must do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an embolism, then leave the stricture and the stones inside for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	If you consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed or swollen; or if food is prohibited in order to reach the limb by the action of the stricture; then rectify all this as we have said.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May be if you are confident that no cause of this will arise, then do not remove the ligament but keep it for three days or more.</end_of_turn>
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient rest on the side of the bed, and the legs more so over the stomach.</end_of_turn
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause over the attendants who are eating pork fat with ointment, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not deliated or dissolved the figure of the fractured limb, or that the ligament is softened, therefore rectify all this with your art.</end_of_turn
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause food for the patient according to the order we have given more, except that food be soft at the beginning until it has been chewed; and the hour cover that the food be taken away from them.</end_of_turn
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	As for the custom of the attendants and the limb is that they be strengthened in forty days; and the hour cover that they be taken away and that bath and medicine be administered with the ones that rectify this.</end_of_turn>
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is delayed, then do not remove the ligament and the stones before six weeks or two months.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xii.	End of Document</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Restoration of a Fractured Arm.</start_of_turn
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm consists of two bones which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the one is small, which is called the olecranon, and the other is large, which is that which is supported from behind the little finger, from the part beyond the wrist.</start_of_turn
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it is strong that only the large bone is fractured, or only the small, or both are fractured together.</start_of_turn
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small bone is fractured, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.</start_of_turn
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the large bone is fractured behind the wrist, the fracture is bad, and the healing is difficult.</start_of_turn
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And the worse of all is when both bones are fractured together.</start_of_turn
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone that is fractured is the small one outside, it is convenient for the doctor to restore it, which should be done with little extension until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if the large bone is fractured, the hour cover that you pause extension even more violently.</start_of_turn
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured together, the hour cover that you must keep the limb still as much as possible.</start_of_turn
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must keep the figure of the hand still during the restoration of it and the extension of it supported on a cushion, and that the thumb be lower than the other fingers, and the wrist be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be sitting on a cushion.</start_of_turn
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion under the arm or on the side of the arm, so that the patient does not move.</start_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let the attendants extend the arm from the part beyond the wrist towards the shoulder or towards the ligament, and another attendant extend them in the same way.</start_of_turn
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the doctor should heal the bone until it is reduced according to the better figure that can be made.</start_of_turn
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is swelling of the bone, the hour perforates to reduce the whole limb in the socket with your art.</start_of_turn
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate swelling that makes you fear that it will not be healed, the hour must leave it and keep it as we have said before.</start_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	And if the fracture is in the palm of the hand, and I have already said enough about this case, take care of that.</start_of_turn
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an embolism occurs at the beginning of your restoration, the hour lays a bandage with a little rosemary and white wax, and let it be half between stiffness and softness, and strengthen the bandage over that which is over the stricture until the embolism is gone; and the hour leaves the bandage and pauses the plaster prepared from powdered gypsum with lime, and put on the stones; and let the stone which is placed over that fracture be more firm and strong.</start_of_turn
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The bones of the arm bear witness in the greater abundance, or a fracture in one or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And thus hold the stricture firmly over the fractured area more strongly and more urgently, and when more than one part above the fracture or below it should be stretched out a little more than before according to the recollection of the same in the beginning of the chapter.</end_of_turn>
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths which cover the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is stitched should be strong enough either from itself or between the warp and weft, as we have recounted.</end_of_turn>
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and the ligament nearby for a few days.</end_of_turn
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which rectification is necessary, even as it happens to the limb, then cover that you may embrocate the limb with cold water until the itching subsides.</end_of_turn
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And keep the limb still until it has recovered, and then remove the stricture.</end_of_turn>
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the swelling has already subsided and the bone has already regained its shape and seems like this, then rectify everything with your skill.</end_of_turn
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider also if the nourishment is prohibited to reach the limb due to excessive stricture, for it is necessary to soften that a little and leave it for a few days until the nourishment reaches it again, and strengthen that.</end_of_turn
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient has no other cause for the matters we have mentioned, then do not remove the dressing for about xx days or so.</end_of_turn
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And thus suspend the patient's hand for their ability to move restlessly, and make them sleep on the bed two.</end_of_turn>
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or more likely in xxviii days, and all this according to the condition of the complications and the ability.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.</end_of_turn>
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that in the thumb and the fingers there is a fracture of the bones, and it does not happen to them except accompanied by soft tissue tears.</end_of_turn
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or there is an abrasion, then the patient must continue to fall and bend it lightly as before, and place their hand over that which is extended.</end_of_turn
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And thus the minister extends the fractured bones, and the doctor should unite them until they are congruent with good union.</end_of_turn
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And it is necessary to keep the dressing and bandage still, if not a cautery is necessary; and pause the star above according to the amount of the area, and you have already covered that with cloth.</end_of_turn
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the break is in the lower parts of the palm, you must leave the palm of the hand relaxed, and command the patient to strengthen that which is their fractured thumb; strengthen that with a long bandage.</end_of_turn
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And the star of the forearm must be applied to the palm so that the forearm is applied to the palm; and strengthen that as much as is necessary.</end_of_turn
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is at the ends of the bones, then it is necessary to remove the star above and another star below in the palm, so that the hand is opened and closed; and then pause the stricture, even if the hand is rotated between the fingers with the ligaments.</end>
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, if it is said to be loose, then it should be united as much as is necessary and the palm must be strengthened if you wish, and if you want, pause the small ring finger to raise the fracture and not to break it.</end>
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in the other fingers, just as in the middle joint, or in the index, or in the ring, or in the little finger, then it should be united and bound with the finger to which it is related; or they should all be bound continuously, which is better; or pause over that small star as we have said above.</end
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your restoration, and indeed that which opposes the custom — with the exception of the surgeon — with what is said to be caused by any of those things, according to the narration of these things.</end
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.</end_of_turn
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	De restauration de fractura del os de la coyssa.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone being moved about is fractured and is declared to be converted to the surrounding parts and the sovereign pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done in this way that the ligament is stretched over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient lies prone on the belly and on the face
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends all the ligament to its quality according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	May be at the root of the thigh, but the ligament is properly placed to the nail at the fifth part, so that the extension is made there, and the other ligament leaves the fracture
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the fracture is at the nail, then properly place the ligament to the nail and make the extension to the parts beyond
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor should bite the bone on both sides as much as he can until he reduces that which is according to the natural shape; and the bone is united by good junction; the hour is that he stops applying pressure and performs stricture, if it does not happen to the limb afterwards
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	And if it happens afterwards, the hour is that you leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides, and then you return to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stricture is like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and bend it two or three times, and remove the excess; and then cover the wound until it reaches the hip and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long thread firmly between the thigh and the wound near the nail at the parts beyond, and bring the extremities of the thread from the part furthest from the sovereign pus to the two parts, and then roll over the wound and the thigh as much as the bandage allows
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And stop on the thigh in the place of that fracture, and stop with two staples on the bone of the wound
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the space between the wound and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the stricture is coagulated
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin to tighten the stricture firmly from the middle over the place of the fracture with three layers or four, and when you have advanced as much as you can along the ligament at the place of the fracture, your stricture is less and lighter and softer
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend two ends of the thread to the parts beyond until it reaches the ankle, and strengthen both ends of the staples of the other part so that the ligament is not strained from the joint
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And keep the stricture on for as long as this, so that no accident happens to the limb crooked or swelling or pus; and if any of these things happen, then immediately take it away and rectify what happened as soon as possible, as we have said above.</start_of_turn>
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	And if in the bone is bad of the bone which you put, then cover that as much as you can; and if not, go away from it and leave that, and care for what precedes the memory until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And many other things are strengthened in this fracture of the thigh as well as the nails, as we have said in the treatise and in the books.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it in this way does not happen to the patient's lameness; and if it is restored alone, without applying the other bandage, it is necessary to clamp that from which the pulse comes from
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months or a few weeks, and all this according to the diversity of the conditions and the other means.
Capitol .xv.	End of text.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that the fracture of the thigh bone is often accompanied by swelling, but it does not happen always with the movement of the limb
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if it happens to happen, the fracture is only a fissure or break in its parts, and that is from swelling or pus, and over that all is placed as it is with the feeling
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is in such a way that it is supported until it is reunited and joined as much as possible for equality and facility and manufacture
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And pause pressure with plaster and pause over that round staple, if you command; and strengthen your stricture as much as is convenient
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Considering all the precautions recommended in other fractures, such as the application of cautery and similar measures that oppose any unforeseen event until health is restored.
Capitol .xvi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.</start_of_turn>
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Reduce the swelling or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.</start_of_turn>
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.</start_of_turn>
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	Considering all the precautions recommended in other fractures, such as the application of cautery and similar measures that oppose any unforeseen event until health is restored.</start_of_turn>
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	When both bones are fractured together, the limb is converted into many pieces.</start_of_turn>
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	When the smaller bone is fractured, the limb is converted into fragments.</start_of_turn
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	When the larger bone is fractured, the limb remains whole, and this is one of the causes of its not being recognized.</start_of_turn
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And administer extension, equalization, and stitching of the fragments according to the healing.</start_of_turn
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the limb is delayed and has many soft tissues attached, that the extension should be milder and more gentle, and relieve with your skill.</start_of_turn
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the limb there is any cause of operation on the forearm, and it is when you have healed the breaks and when the whole of the surrounding tissue has been restored, that you will take off the dressings that have been placed for the causes that have been mentioned above; apply grease of palm oil to those that require it, but do not be generous with the dressings, and let the length of these be according to the length of the limb and the degree of swelling.</start_of_turn
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And cover each wound with two coverings according to their length, and place one over the part of the limb from one side and the other, and the other from the inside of the foot.</start_of_turn
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And bind the two fragments in three places, at the two extremities and at the middle, so that the limb is prohibited from leaning to the right and left, and stays in a good position.</start_of_turn
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a plaster cast has already been administered according to the length of the limb; and keep the limb fixed in it so that it conserves any movement.</start_of_turn
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Above all, cover more than enough what is in fracture, and when that is placed properly.</start_of_turn
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Consider in every day the limb and study it carefully, and take care of it so that it avoids posturing, swelling or other causes resembling these; and when any of these causes occur, then remove it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xvii.	End of document.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.</start_of_turn
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not usually fracture; however, the bones of the foot may fracture several times; and in the toes fractures are rare, and do not occur except in exceptional circumstances.</start_of_turn
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot must fracture several times, and sometimes these bones must be elevated one upon the other, then place the patient's foot on the prepared earth as if going out.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And place the other foot over what is elevated from those bones, and put on shoes, and bind, and heal those until they are reunited in the places.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And place a plaster cast and stop displacement, and keep the belly of the foot a little higher than the two plastic heads.</start_of_turn
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen that which has been stretched down, because you have covered that with cloth and other causes that indicate.</start_of_turn
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, remove the bandage, because you will find the bones united, or fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus completed with cunning.</start_of_turn
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	However, if some of the toes are fractured, restore those, and bandage those as well as I have said and recommend for the restoration of the fingers of the hand.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And almost stop the nail to the third phalanges according to the length of the finger; and put a little pressure on it; and then leave the foot on the table which is recommended to you, and stretch that which is strictured downwards.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	Maybe if the nail is fractured from two or three places or more, then you must stop over every fingernail and hold it by the amount of its circumference enclosed in soft leather, and stretch the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand over one of the feet of the table so that the foot has good retention
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you to know that you must not forget the other causes which we have mentioned in other fractures of the accidents which we have mentioned; and be cautious of any other ailment that may coexist with this.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn>
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the bone of the thigh and of the fifth metatarsal bone and of the heel of the foot.</start_of_turn>
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the bone of the thigh is fractured, then cease in the crease of the knee, and lean that towards the side of the two with a little pressure, and keep it pressed from behind.</start_of_turn
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And almost fill the wound of the knee with a pad, and make a point in the bone of the knee as expected; and elevate the two of them little by little, so that everything that is outside is forgotten until the part of the bone that was broken is returned.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And almost put powder on the two of them, and when you are finished urinating, massage the knee easily and gently, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which it was at the beginning, and almost return the powder at the beginning.</start_of_turn
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or until it is restored.</start_of_turn
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take once of these and stretch over the ankle of the foot a needle of ivory; and bring all the air out of the bladder into the bone of the foot, and almost squeeze in the needle until the bladder is inflated within the bone, because the fracture returns.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And almost fill the wound and stay like that for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the fifth metatarsal bone of the foot or the thigh bone is fractured, then administer in the restoration and healing of them what we have recommended for the ankle bone.</start_of_turn
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is fractured is not hidden in these principal fractures and that little debt, mainly to the one who is able to understand this book and me; for that fracture signifies to you in the greatest possibilities of recovery in the restoration and in the stretching of them, and therefore understand well.</start_of_turn
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And in the heel of the foot when it is fractured, take guard of the skin, and put the heel in that; and almost stop over the covering of the wound, and cover it, and almost leave it for three days or so, and let it heal.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.</start_of_turn
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the bones when it is inflamed.</start_of_turn
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient in that in which the fracture has occurred with swelling, and especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or the assistant, or similar to that, that you take care of it and apply compresses to that extent as much as the conditions of inflammation allow you or as the testifiers have testified.</start_of_turn
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling goes away, when the powder has been applied to it, cover that you keep the retention of them in any way that you can, if for another reason it is not present.</start_of_turn
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And almost start to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong that, if it does not happen afterwards.</start_of_turn
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	And if afterwards there happens a relapse, when you must leave the restoration of them until the relapse has passed, and do not approach it in the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause other accidents.</start_of_turn
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	And if the fractured bone is prominent over the heel, when you must pierce to reduce that and equalize that with your hands as easily and as little extension as possible.</start_of_turn
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	And if the extension is not suitable for you and the equality of them with your thighs is difficult, when you must reduce that with your hands as much as possible; and that is a wound that is made with a needle, the length of which is of seven or eight and the width according to the amount of the swelling; and for this reason the doctor must take into consideration these three or four according to the amount that indicates in the care of all kinds of fracture.</start_of_turn
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Be gentle, and let the patient rest in a slight degree of elevation so that the wound does not swell up during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Let the patient extend the limb to which the mark is made on the limbs; and let them rest of the limb from its root to its joints.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how it is done:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called “labre volentz atelarem” in Greek, so it is somewhat pale.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it must be suspended from the acute limb to the eminence of the limb
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And put a pledget under it until the bone returns, and let it be equal to any incision
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore strive to equalize the limb fracture between them, and if the fractured limb is fragile, and you do not wish to cause further discomfort, then you must insert the limb of that bone until the instrument has the power to grasp it
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Even if you are unable to reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, however, you must remove from the incisions those which cover the instruments which we have mentioned; or saw that which is with one of the saws in whatever way you are able.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And remove that which remains in the bone of asperities and small sores.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences acute pain, then know that the bone has not been returned to its natural place; and then do whatever you can to comfort the patient greatly
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When the restoration of the limb is complete which you have made to the bone, then immediately immerse the limb in black vinegar, and properly if it is summer, and do not place over the wound cerate or any other cause in which there is oil, for it causes it to swell up and decay
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And immediately administer sponges at the time of the meal in addition to the restoration of the limb, and leave the wound uncovered until it has been sutured with needles and bandages according to the quantity of the wound
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take care that you do not tighten the wound at the fracture, for this may cause the limb to swell up like the fools of doctors, and cause greater discomfort to the patient, so be gentle.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the limb is strict, soft, different from the stricture of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear that some mishap has occurred to those which we have recommended, and if there is pain in the place, then do not hesitate to remove the staples, but rather make a covering of gauze instead of needles and tighten it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When a day or two has passed since the wound has begun to heal, if there is swelling in it, then take out the sponge which you had placed over that which you had previously poured over it, and immediately administer cold compresses, as it is customary for us to treat wounds, even with tetracycline and remaining like that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Remind them that you must remove the ligament and consider the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and stopped, and that the limb should be prepared in such a way that the swelling will go away from the limb to the joints without difficulty
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days have passed since the wound has occurred, and it is neither consolidated nor separated from the limb by the swelling, then know that there is stagnation of the small vessels in it so that you must treat the wound immediately to prevent further damage to the wound
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those that remain separated remove those that cause pain and make the limb swell up, perforate it so that you can insert them as easily as possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If the wound happens to be black or green, or any other sign of corruption and putrefaction, then know that it is necessary to take action, or another kind of treatment, and that you must tell the chief physician about it.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And when you are dealing with something serious and you appear to be in the presence of a cripple: when the limb is fractured, consider the limb as if it were the limb of the patient and the limb of the assistant and remain like those of the great limbs, and do not presume to attract it, or to extract it, for that may cause death; have it stay in place until it has healed, for it is strong enough to fall by itself in about twenty or thirty days. And take care of the wound if you see it, and if you do not leave it alone
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.</end_turn>
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the care of nodules that happen in the aftermath of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The nodules mentioned above appear in the healing process of fractures, mainly due to joint stiffness, and often impede the natural functioning of the limb; therefore, it is important to prevent excessive movement of the limb during treatment.</end_of_turn>
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Considering if the nodule is recent, administer astringents such as aloes, and bruise, see, and touch, and mark with ink or paint; if you take some of these or all of them, and confirm that they are effective in stifling, or in spreading like glue, or in making the area around the nodule rigid.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Keep the limb still for several days; then remove the dressing and repeat the procedure until the nodule has subsided; or support the lamina of lead that hangs down, because lead has the property of healing all that is swollen in the limbs.</end_of_turn>
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Even if the nodule is already solidified and hardened, if it is necessary to remove it, do so cautiously, and cut away the surrounding tissue, leaving only the solid part; remove any excess fat or soft tissue that remains until the wound has healed; care for the wound until it has healed completely.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxi.	(The provided text continues with additional medical instructions and observations, but the translation of those sections is not included in this response.)</end_of_turn>
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Restoration of a fracture when the limb is restored and at this point the limb should be kept flexible according to its natural movement.</end_of_turn>
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has healed, and at this point the limb is flexible, the following causes may prevent proper healing: too much tension on the ligament and its surrounding tissue due to inadequate support; excessive stiffness of the ligaments, preventing proper nutrition to the limb; excessive swelling; abnormal movement at an inappropriate time; insufficient support in the patient's condition, or weakness in the limb.</end_of_turn
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Care for the patient by giving them food and making them comfortable until their health has improved; administer baths; and make them drink wine and broth.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And keep the limb still to prevent the area from being deprived of nourishment, or to continue swelling with cold water, until the nourishment returns to its normal state.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxii.	(The provided text ends with additional medical advice and observations, but their translation is not included in this response.)</end_of_turn
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Care for bones that have been fractured by keeping them immobilized until they have healed without causing them to move excessively.)
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a limb that has already healed undergoes further healing, there is risk of stiffness and swelling in the bone that has fractured; therefore, do not impede the natural movement of the limb, even if you see that the fractured part persists.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Indeed, many foolish doctors and healers have made mistakes in their practice, and this operation is not without great fear, for it is often fatal.</end_of_turn>
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the fracture and the nodule are recent, it is necessary to soak the limb in water with many soft herbs such as fennel, chamomile, and marjoram; or to apply plaster to the limb with plaster of Paris and balsam; or to apply poultice made of poppy seeds and oil of cedar, or to apply figs and lead powder and olive oil, or to put on greasy substances and bind the limb with linen thread like the ancient physicians do.</end_of_turn
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Many wounds dissolve with prolonged use of the limb that is being treated, and should be given regular exercise at all times.</end_of_turn>
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the stiffness has already disappeared and has become firm and solidified, it is necessary to treat it with iron, because this is when the pus becomes detached and the fracture heals; it is necessary to remove the surplus of soft tissue and bone that remains under the skin, and to administer medicine that facilitates healing in this area.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxiii.	(The provided text ends with additional medical advice and observations, but their translation is not included in this response.)</end_of_turn
De sermo en dislocacio.	The provided text does not include any information regarding dislocation, so I am unable to provide a translation for this section.</end_of_turn
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the abnormal displacement of any joint in the limb, causing it to become immobile, and is accompanied by pain and great damage to the surrounding tissues.</end_of_turn
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to seek medical attention as soon as possible to reduce the dislocation without delay, as if it is delayed, the limb is deformed and the dislocation becomes more difficult to reduce.</end_of_turn
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And let me remind you not to move or stretch at the time of elimination, because the moisture seen during that time can cause spasms and pain in the lower parts.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When it happens, let me tell you to keep still during the emptying of the bowels, and immediately place your hand inside until you restore the elimination; then keep the limbs well-covered with warm water and oil, and reduce with ease.</end_of_turn>
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all parts should be treated with the water from which the recollection will arise in this area.</end_of_turn>
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	I have already ordered the heads of dislocation according to what precedes fracture; from the upper part of the body up to the lower part.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxiiii.	Sentence .xxiiii.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Treatment of dislocation of the jaw bone.</start_of_turn
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Both jaws are dislocated if they are not quickly treated; and the dislocation of both is usually caused in two ways: either they are loosely displaced from their places for little movement, or they are completely dislocated and complete, until they are softened at the junction before saliva from the bowels comes out and it does not want to open the mouth or swallow, and the tongue is wrapped around in its saliva.</start_of_turn
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it usually returns by itself without any cause.</start_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and complex, let me tell you that it must be treated with reduction as soon as possible, and must not be delayed.</start_of_turn
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's body, and the doctor should put his thumb of his right hand on the root of the dislocation of the jaw outwards from the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or put both thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and order the patient to stop opening their jaws and to swallow what is in their mouths; and the doctor should gently restrain the jaw and bandage the jaw until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, let me tell you to administer vaporization with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both has been achieved and is not delayed, as we have said.</start_of_turn
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	When they return and are softened, close the patient's mouth and do not soften them, let me tell you to stop over those grains of barley around the cheek, and apply wax and oil; and hold them firmly with ease.</start_of_turn
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	Let the patient sleep on their two sides, with their head resting between two cushions, so that neither the right side nor the left side is strained; do not force them to swallow anything further; have the patient abstain from eating anything until the pains have subsided and the jaws are no longer clenched, and when the pain has gone.</start_of_turn
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let me remind you to administer with ease, and do not irritate the opening of the mouth by eating and drinking and speaking, until the jaw is healed and restored.</start_of_turn
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and is not completed at the usual places, let me tell you that moisture seen during this time can cause fever and persistent vomiting, and that it is very dangerous for the patient's belly, and is very bad and vomiting pure bile.</start_of_turn
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When it is seen often, let me tell you that it is a loss; and moisture seen at this time usually dies within a few days.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxv.	Sentence .xxv.</start_of_turn
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Treatment of dislocation of the sternum and the end of the muscle.</start_of_turn
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The sternum is not displaced from the side towards the inside due to its continuation with the feet; and some are displaced outwards, and this is declared by the feeling.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration is that the patient sits on their two sides and extends their arms.</start_of_turn
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And hold the area with your palm with great pressure, so that it returns.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And let me tell you to rest over that plaster and powder and strengthen that.</start_of_turn
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	And if the limb that is supporting the pain continues to suffer, it is not dislocated in any day; let me tell you that it must be reduced and softened as we have said and as you have been told.</start_of_turn
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then command the patient to rest on that plaster, sprinkle some powder on it, and extract the obstruction, and order the patient to remain quiet and still until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this method of treatment the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from the hip joint.
Capitol .xxvi.	(The text ends here.)</start_of_turn>
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.</start_of_turn>
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which is one that it is dislocated at the level of the tibia to the level below.</start_of_turn
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, which is what is usually done; and it is not dislocated at the back for the scapula; and it is not dislocated at the front for the nerves.</start_of_turn
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Mostly it is dislocated and outwards at the lower end of the tibia, and more especially in those in whom the flesh is little, willingly it is dislocated; more in those in whom there is much flesh, it is outwards with difficulty.</start_of_turn
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very often in such cases of percussion or fall, the muscle of the limb is fractured by fracture, and is separated from its aponeurosis by fracture, and is cured in the same way as when it is already dislocated.</start_of_turn
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then when you have finished with this, when you are sure that the limb is sufficiently relaxed, then proceed with the treatment of the limb.</start_of_turn
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of the limb is when it is at the lower end of the tibia; so that you must distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you will find among these different appearances; and you will find on the head of the muscle a concavity and below the tibia towards the touch of the head of the muscle as if there were a ball, and to the patient it is not possible to reduce the hand to the hip without pain, or to move that without pain.</start_of_turn
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated at the level of the toes or above, and you see that it is painful on touch, do not conceal it.</start_of_turn
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation is useful a gentle reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.</start_of_turn
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of the limb is that the minister raises the hand of the limb above the knee; and immediately place the toes below the tibia of the limb, and raise the joint forcefully to the hip joint, and the minister raises the hand of the limb and extends that; and immediately pause that so that it returns willingly.</start_of_turn
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	More if, although we have said that it does not return, nevertheless from the beginning of the dislocation, moving for several days, the patient should be bathed in lukewarm water and be administered embrocation that softens and smoothens as if it were ointment of high rank, and ruether, and meadowsweet in water, and be administered.</start_of_turn
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And immediately put the patient to rest on the two hips and stop the tibia of the limb from moving until the swelling has gone down between elevation and traction, and immediately the doctor places a support under the thigh, and raises the head of the muscle forcefully, and grasps the hand of the patient so that it is not painful at the lower parts, and another minister holds the head of the patient, that it is not painful at the lower parts, for that reason both together must return to the hip joint.</start_of_turn
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce in this manner: and that you see a man who is longer than the patient, and who is on that side, and insert the thigh muscle between the tibia of the patient and elevate the tibia to the level above that the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister grasps the hand of the patient from the lower parts of the thigh.</start_of_turn
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	More if the patient is flexible, the hour that another cause is suspended, so that it is grave that the dislocation returns so soon.</start_of_turn
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced immediately in another manner: and that there be fixed on the ground a long staff whose head is rounded like a mortar pestle, which is neither thick nor thin, and immediately place it under the patient; because by placing the head of the staff over the drape of the loin, the patient is standing according to the length of the staff, and immediately extend the hand of the limb towards the lower parts of the other side; and extend the body of the limb from the other side with force, so that the joint returns to the hip joint quickly.</start_of_turn
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the limb for all the causes that we have said, the hour that you use this treatment: and that you take a staff whose quantity is as long as two cubits, and the breadth of it is four fingers, and the thickness of it is relieved in the groin of the tibia in this way:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And thus about the head of the patient, put a leather cushion to prevent it from being injured by the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And thus, rest your hands from the patient's genitals, extend your hand or arm over the belly towards the thighs, and bind the belly against the attendants and arms and the tip of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And thus, rest your arms on a stool or bench according to the width, and extend your hand towards the thighs, and suspend the other limb from the other side, so that the joint is relaxed in all directions
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the bowels are complete according to any way that you are able, and when you have covered that you rest from the genitals, hope that some liquid may remain in the belly; and thus prepare a plaster with meal powder and alum of lead over all the muscles, even if it is rotated downwards, and strengthen the genitals with stricture downwards; and the ligament is rotated over the plaster, and the hand of the patient is attached to the collar, and is laid, and do not touch the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And thus keep the patient's food and drink small, until the limb is comforted, for it is more likely to recover quickly
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And thus the food should be given more often every seven or eight days, or exercise should be performed; and thus if it is stopped and is not softened, the hour has already healed.</start_of_turn>
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	However, if the joint is dislocated, even if caused by humidity that affects it or for another reason, it is necessary to administer cautery three times, as it is said in the chapter of cautery.</start_of_turn>
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this has been done and seven days have passed, if the ligament has not been relapsed and the joint has not been arrested, and the plaster and the stricture have been reduced from it whatever has been raised, and it has not been arrested and cast off and cannot raise that limb towards the thighs, then know that the nerves of that limb, which are at the head of the muscle, are already insensitive or extended or softened, and that the joint will never be fixed in place again.</start_of_turn>
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	As for the dislocation of that which is useful to prevent the feet and the knee or the buttocks, the reduction is useful with impulse and extension with the greatest force, until it returns.</start_of_turn
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And it should be administered in the other way, and take care that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if by chance the healing of the gravity in the limb is delayed and the movement of the limb is late, then the patient must make use of a cushion made of soft things until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.</start_of_turn
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the care of the dislocation of the knee.</start_of_turn
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the knee joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and that which is dislocated throughout is more especially at the front than at the back, and the dislocation of the limb is not hidden from you because it is seen from outside or from the touch according to what is dislocated, and when you have adjusted the knee dislocation from the socket, that is to say when you make it manifest, that the joint is concave and cannot bend the limb, nor touch any of the muscles.</start_of_turn
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And thus keep the knee bent, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible until it returns to its place after the cautery has gone away, because if you see it after the cautery has gone away, the reduction is difficult, and it is not healed of all; and most especially when it is at the back, because it is worse of all the other kinds of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many soft things must be put on that in order to make it die.</start_of_turn
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand be extended with two hands, the arms be expanded, and the hands of the doctor be over the knee and hold it, and the plaster the joint with the nails of the thumbs, or at the root of the palm so that it returns to its place.</start_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And even if the dislocation is at the front, the hour returns just as much as it bends the hand with the hand, until it breaks the knee at the root of the palm.</start_of_turn
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, the hour gives violent extension and much force.</start_of_turn
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants extend the arms, and hold that eye with two assistants so that it is not left behind during the extension.</start_of_turn
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And thus rotate the arms throughout the part, because it is enveloped with soft matter folded long over the hand, or ligament.</start_of_turn
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it so that these causes which help to lubricate the joint are facilitated; and then he should gently press the joint inwards until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And he should reduce the swelling that has occurred on the limb by applying a compress which is adhesive and exudes moisture from a paste of alum, and which should be removed with a tight dressing, and the arm should be suspended from the collarbone and left in place for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And so if the joint is formed in the heel, then you should dissect the ligament of the ankle and leave it loose.</start_turn>
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if the joint is not too painful, then you should cover it with a plaster and leave the ligament in place, leaving it in for several days until it is removed; and then dissect it.</start_turn>
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	However, if the limb is affected by gravity during the reduction of the joint, and its condition is in motion, then administer moisture in broth and olive oil, and compress, until the swelling has subsided; or rest on the joint without movement, since it is an oily swelling; and then bind it, and leave it in place for the day and night.</start_turn
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And so on, put on the bath; and when the swelling subsides, then gently massage the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat the process once more, so that there is a total of three treatments.</start_turn
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread throughout the bowels, within which it is limited.</end_of_turn
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, rest on the wound of the moist and scaly ulcer at the border and stretch over that; and perform several compresses, so that it becomes moist and reduces its swelling.</start_turn
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.</start_turn
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the care of dislocation of the limb, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.</start_turn
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the hand bones are dislocated, the reduction of the dislocation is light; on the contrary to other joints, however, care must be taken in the reduction of the dislocation in the time that it is dislocated, since it may cause damage to the bone or that there is a fracture in it.</start_turn
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the hand of the patient on a table and extend the limb, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the imminent part of the joint, and gently press inwards until it returns to its original position.</start_turn
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered if the palm is already bent inwards of the hand, then the patient should support two fingers of his hand on a table beside the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preexistent, you should support two fingers of the hand, since the hand of the doctor should be placed over that imminent part of the joint.</start_turn
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns well, it is good; and if not, then press that part with a plaster while giving up the fracture and leaving it; do not repeat this treatment until several days have passed.</start_turn
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint must remain according to its flexibility; and do not notice to the patient any cause, but that the hand is softened and cannot withstand any cause; for it is understood that the nerves are cut or crushed, and that it is not strained in it except for the pressure of the treatment and the force that is given to it.</start_turn
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the limb is returned, then pause over it the plaster that has been recommended, and leave it and stretch it for five days; and then it should be dissected and left loose, and the hand should be exercised.</start_turn
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if there is still stiffness in it and any gravity occurs in it, then you should moisten that part with warm water and perform several compresses until it is relieved.</start_turn
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.</start_turn
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the care of dislocation of the fingers.</start_turn
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some fingers are dislocated throughout.</start_turn
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or at the root of the finger, then you should hold the finger still and gently press the dislocation back into place.</start_turn
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And support the tip of the finger, suspend that beyond the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.</start_turn
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And so suspend it and extend it until it returns to its original position.</start_turn
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When night comes, lie down as that story tells you, and do not cease to unbind that one in the day and exercise with movement, and lie down at night; and do this for several days until it is healed.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same as before, if it is dislocated under the thumb, and lie down until that part is healed and do the first operation again, until it is healed.</end_of_turn>
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same as before, if it is dislocated in other parts.</end_of_turn>
Capitol .xxx.	End of document.</end_of_turn>
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the bones of the knee.</end_of_turn
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an accident happens to any of the bones of the knee or the ankle is dislocated completely, and so remain loose the bones of the limb, in that case there is no treatment, for death covers the patient.</end_of_turn
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient is outside their will, and cannot be retained; and many times it is recommended to soften the limb by means of its veins or two incisions of its flesh, or one of these; or that one bone be broken, for in that case many times the bone must be broken and many times it must be broken for the evacuation to take place.</end_of_turn
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore that one is already broken at the back and is called gelboil.</end_of_turn
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of these is that you consider if the gelboil comes from infancy, for in that case neither treatment nor healing is of any use.</end_of_turn
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	More often we see in cases of accident or percussion or even by suspicion that the Ancients speak of various methods of treatment, of which the most profitable return to profit; however, I already mentioned that little is known of most of them because of their excessive number, for my proximity to the understanding of their exposure, to which I have already alluded and from which I have learned much.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that in gelboil that comes from the front of the foot, neither bandage nor healing is of that; and in the same way as for two fractures.</end_of_turn
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The only one that is cured of these is that which happens in the two bones themselves as I recommend.</end_of_turn
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And let the patient be placed with his face downwards on a soft cushion of cloth, and extend from him the limb as much as possible so that it does not touch the bones of the foot.</end_of_turn
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place another support under the knee, fixed to the ground at the top of the limb, and another support outside the foot at the bottom of the limb.</end_of_turn
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister has the support, and does not hold it fixed in the fossa; and another minister has the other in the same way.</end_of_turn
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And cover the head of the patient with a bandage and leave the toes uncovered; extend the limb from the thigh to the foot support and hold it there; and do the same with the other limb from the hip to the foot.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the ministers extend the limb to the support, and do not break both supports and the ligaments of the limbs in which they are placed, although indeed we have said this.</end_of_turn
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the bone with force until it returns, or that he places them on a table, and that he adjusts under the table the feet of the patient until they return.</end_of_turn
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, take a table whose breadth or length is three palms, and make a hole in the wall where we have said that it is proper for the patient to be placed a limb in which the limb of the table is inserted.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the heel of the table on the bone, the doctor places the feet of the patient on the other side, and gently pull until the bone is fractured and returns to its place.</end_of_turn>
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, or turn it around with the hand; and stay on the ground with the head of the patient behind the knee of the two supports, the length of which is an arm, and place the head of the limb behind the knee of the limb outwards two supports; and the length is as much as between any two supports a palm, and there is already a break in any support in which the return is made, and that nothing is fixed on the ground so that it is not crushed.</end_of_turn
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	The joint pain is caused by cold humors that spread throughout the body, and when it affects the feet, doctors commonly call it gout.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of the limb is a joint in which the foot is formed, its length being equal to one palm from heel to toe; and in the two other thighs it is similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And now strengthen the ligaments that you have stretched in the patient's feet at the joint that is opposite their head, and the ligaments that you have stretched in the space between their thighs at the joint that is opposite their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And now you must finish with each joint and appoint a minister who will support the joint with his hand, and the doctor will grasp the vertebra according to what has been said
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the manner of the joint
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Once the vertebra has been returned, and the limb has been grasped, then immediately place over the excision some ointment made from alum and vinegar, and cover it; and place over the ointment a bandage about three fingers wide or somewhat more, and the length of the bandage should be equal to the height of the swelling, and place it over the part of the vertebra that is below the head of the joint.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And so keep it bound with the ligament that we have mentioned, and use the patient a nourishing diet until they are healed
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any swelling remains in the limb at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe the swelling, with the administration of alum; this has been recommended; and it is administered in that limb of lead lamina of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	In every case where there is suspicion of imminent dislocation of the bones of the two thighs, it is cured by that dislocation; and that is the bone which has already been mentioned as being in imminent danger of causing death if it should suffer further injury from this medicine.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXII
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not suffer only from dislocation, but also from other affections that affect the other joints of the limb distant from the head and with concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, that is, to the back, to the front, to the upper part, or to the lower part
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Mostly it is dislocated at the back, and rarely at the front or at the sides
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	A sign of dislocation at the back is that, when you adjust the limb of the healthy patient against the limb of the patient, the nail is longer and more prominent than in the healthy limb, the limb cannot bend its knee over the ankle, and the limb is limp from the knee downwards after a traumatic fall, because the head of the bone has already been fractured here
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the dislocation at the front is that the injuries to it are contrary to this one.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of dislocation at the upper part is that the limb expands slightly following the wound, however it does not bend where it is painful; and if you force it to bend there, it cannot go beyond that point; and the urine is retained and the feces are delayed, and you must walk the patient on the tiptoes
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of dislocation at the lower part is that it does not expand the limb, nor does it permit bending of that knee which bends the feces, the limb is shorter than the other, the feces are softened, and the head of the bone is below that point
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	More reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, in fact, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it is already antiquated, and that you must not do anything about it; for in such a case it is not necessary to do so.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	More in the case where the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you must support the joint and extend it to the back and front, and also to the right and left, for that is what will cause it to return and will not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	More so, if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare strong ministers and extend the limb beyond the knee, or beyond the ankle, or over the ligament which is stretched over the limb; and another minister should grasp the hand of that side that holds the ankles and press with his thumbs the area of the limb; and strengthen with a grip the ligament over the hip, and have another minister hold the limb of the patient.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And reduce the swelling or abscess to its concavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the abscess from bursting.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And extend all of them [the limbs] in a straight line until the patient is elevated above the ground and remains suspended
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this method of extension is common to all four [limbs].
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And thus, if the dislocation returns to what has been said, it is good; but if not, it is necessary to apply some means of treatment as we have said before
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of it [the dislocation] itself, when it is dislocated, if the dislocation is to the front, cover that the patient is resuscitated over the buttock; and place your hand over the ligament at the root of the thigh in that place where between the head of the thigh and the place that remains to be extended.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister should firmly press the patient's flanks, and measure the great toe of the painful thigh and extend it outwards by violent extension, so that that which returned to the proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this is the lightest treatment of the member that has been reduced compared to the other treatments<end_turn>
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If it is excused from you and you do not obey the order concerning this treatment, then cover that both feet of the patient are firmly bound with strong ligatures, with care on both ankles and both knees.<end_turn>
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part is four fingers, and the painful limb is extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the patient should be suspended over the head of the bed, and that is in the greatest amount; and the length of the limb from the ground is the quantity of two thighs.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And order a strong boy to press the head of the thigh, and that it be suspended with the patient; and the other boy will press the thigh with force, so that the joint returns to its proper place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction itself, when the dislocation is to the front, cover that the patient grasps about the heel according to what we have recommended in the former part; and tighten the ligament over the painful limb properly and over the foot of the limb.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And two cushions are placed, one under the foot, and the other under the head; and cushions are placed adjusted to the middle of the limb that is resting on which a damp cloth is wrapped, so that the patient is not wet because the cushion is between the patient's thighs, because from that the extension of the limbs outwards should not be violent.<end_turn>
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And every minister extends their part, and the doctor with their hand grasps the reduction according to the art.<end_turn><end_turn>
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey respectfully, it will be very good; but if not, stop diligently and as we have said in the instructions for that treatment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But cover that the patient grasps about the buttock somewhat.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front, cover that the limb is extended with care, as it is said above; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand over the painful area, and the other hand will compress that which is towards the other foot, and in that compression pause that which is extended outwards from the knee
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the back, cover that the patient is not extended outwards, but is elevated above the ground; having covered that it should be held firmly, even if the ankle is dislocated outwards, as we have said concerning the position of the limb; and it is on its face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, without haste
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And cover that a compress is administered to the area around the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore when the reduction is accomplished as we have said — and the sign of the reduction of the limb is not hidden from you, that is that you extend two limbs of the patient, and when you once again touch those cloths and the patient stretches their limb and expands that limb, you know that the limb according to what we have said has returned — and you adjust two cushions and hold tight and stretch with a bandage so that the ankle is not bruised in any of the parts; and keep the patient still for three days or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And remove the ligament and the bandage, and compare one limb to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When once those boils have burst in the garment, know that the dislocation has already ceased, and now let the patient depart.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if there be any cause of swelling, then return it and cover it up, and extract it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove that, and make the patient walk slowly for a few days, until he is comforted.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxii.	(The text continues with medical instructions and recommendations.)</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the care of dislocation of the elbow.</end_of_turn>
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The elbow is dislocated in three ways, that is, it is dislocated at the outer parts, and at the inner parts, and at the lower parts towards the upper parts; but it is not dislocated at the front parts.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that the patient applies his hand to the thigh; know that the elbow is dislocated.</end_of_turn
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient move his limb, and if you can do this over what is necessary; bind his thigh to his face, and place his foot between his thighs; and in addition bind the elbow to his palms, and keep those between his thighs over the elbow.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery is that his limb adheres to his thigh without laborious movement.</end_of_turn
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then cover that up and bind the limb to his thigh, and tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove those.</end_of_turn
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not let the patient walk for several days, until he is healthy and comfortable.</end_of_turn
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Moreover, if the dislocation has been reduced by you, know that it is excusable to administer strong extension to the ligaments from which it was preceded in the treatment of the hip.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiii.	(The text continues with additional medical instructions and recommendations.)</end_of_turn
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the care of dislocation of the ankle.</end_of_turn
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle has some veins that are easily ligated for slight displacement, and some veins are dislocated according to custom, and the dislocation is caused either by the front parts or the back parts.</end_of_turn
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells up proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.</end_of_turn
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More importantly, the treatment for its displacement is of little reduction, that is, that it is easily extended with the toes flexed and is swollen up until it returns.</end_of_turn
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More importantly, in the treatment of dislocation according to custom, make the patient move his limb, and keep that part firmly in place with a strong and valiant minister from the back of the two of those in the middle of his limb.</end_of_turn
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And put your right hand on the great toe, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot in the place of the ankle.</end_of_turn
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand for two veins, and extend with your left; and support the foot of the limb with your right hand beside the bandage work.</end_of_turn
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do as we have said above two veins.</end_of_turn
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And support the foot of the limb with the bandage for the third vein, and you are at the ankle.</end_of_turn
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one vein or two according to this method, and if sometimes the foot is swollen up, that is good; but if not, know that you must repeat the operation until it returns.</end_of_turn>
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	More importantly, if it is prohibited to reduce it in this way, make the patient walk on his toes over the earth, and loosen a bandage on the earth, and put a cushion between his thighs, and you have already bound him over his limb for so that he does not bruise the patient.</end_of_turn
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the minister of the limb has his thighs, and another minister extends the foot with his toes or with ligaments that lie over the ankle of the foot; and extend the other as much as possible against the extension of the knee, and the cushion is to exist between the patient's thighs to retain that.</end_of_turn
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The doctor grasps the dislocation at the knee, while another attendant holds the healthy limb away from the area where the dislocation has occurred, allowing it to return easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Therefore, when the dislocation has returned and you have declared that the reduction is successful, then remove the plaster and gently stretch the limb, tying it firmly to the limb and the bandage.</end_of_turn>
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware that you fear or guard the nerves that lie behind the heel, so that the ligament above does not become taut and that the limb does not become deformed.</end_of_turn
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then keep the limb still for two days or three; and if the ligament has softened, remove it.</end_of_turn>
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the fourth day or the fifth, remove the dressing and prohibit the patient from bending for forty days.</end_of_turn>
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Even if it is necessary to go up and down that space, it is not harmful for safety that the dislocation is not dissolved or deformed, and that you do not neglect the treatment.</end_of_turn>
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if by any chance the patient has a relapse, cover that you administer in the cessation of the aforementioned narration, in another place of care and treatment, until it has healed.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XLI.</end_of_turn>
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocations of the toes.</end_of_turn
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Therefore, that which is dislocated must be grasped with little traction, and what is not difficult, abstain from it.</end_of_turn
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And if the dislocation is in the ankle bone of the two feet, then cover that you make the patient sit on the ground or on a table, and that he stays like that as if he were going.</end_of_turn
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And keep your feet still, and place the limb over what you anticipate of the joints, and support that limb with the hand until it returns, and that you see that it has healed and does not reappear in the immediate area.</end_of_turn
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And place under the foot of the limb a board that covers the whole foot, which has two caps, and support that limb with the hand so that it is stretched downwards and firm for three days; and then remove it and have the patient walk again for a month, until it is healed and the pain is gone.</end_of_turn
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XLV.</end_of_turn
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocations that are caused by swelling or fracture or any other injury.</end>
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you take care of the treatment and restoration of it, many people succeed in overcoming death.</end>
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this, do not presume that you can provide care for it alone, but rather that one who is skilled in the art, with long experience, mercy and humility, should be taken into account; and let him use medicines at the beginning that do not cause relapse so soon, and let the patient be subject to divine judgment, rather than to that which you hope will bring health, except for the relief of the disease and the hope of salvation.</end>
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore do your utmost to reduce it at the beginning of the disease, before relapse occurs.</end>
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the limb returns as it should, then administer a regimen that does not cause relapse, and care for the swelling with the remedies that are appropriate for it.</end
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is in a fractured bone of the heel separated by a space, then you break the ligament of that, and do as we have said in the simple diseases of the joints above.</end
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Beware and take precautions as you are able, according to your prudence, of that which precedes this, as I have foretold; for what is better for you than the Creator Himself, and more lasting to your glory, and more profitable in the end than all the rest.</end>
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the discourse of Albucasim perfectly well, of which God be praised.</end
Amen.	Amen.</start_of_turn>
